Age-friendly NYC
New Commitments
for a City for
All Ages
Bill de Blasio
NYC Mayor
Richard R. Buery Jr.
Deputy Mayor for Strategic
Policy Initiatives
INTRODUCTION & HISTORY OF AGE-FRIENDLY NYC
CITY INITIATIVES
	
HEALTH & SOCIAL SERVICES
	
HOUSING
 	
PUBLIC SPACES & TRANSPORTATION
	
PUBLIC SAFETY
	
COMMUNICATION & INFORMATION
	
COMMUNITY & CIVIC PARTICIPATION
AGE-FRIENDLY NYC COMMISSION
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
T A B L E  O F  C O N T E N T S
15
19
21
41
51
54
65
71
79
85
 
T H E  C I T Y  O F  N E W  Y O R K  
O F F I C E  O F  T H E  M A Y O R  
N E W  Y O R K ,  N Y  1 0 0 0 7  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dear Friends: 
 
In less than a quarter century, an estimated one in five New Yorkers will be at least 60 
years old. That is a profound change for our city, which will strengthen us, yet presents a 
challenge. We must ensure those who built this city can remain here in comfort and dignity. 
 
My administration is fighting to make this a better and fairer place for all New Yorkers 
and that is what our Age-Friendly NYC initiative is all about. We are helping seniors stay in their 
neighborhoods by building or preserving 200,000 affordable apartments. Through Vision Zero, 
we are making our streets safer for seniors. We are also addressing isolation and other mental 
health issues through ThriveNYC. From transportation to cultural options, we have streamlined 
and improved existing programs to make sure they reach seniors in a more effective way.  
 
History tells us New York City is great because anyone can make it here. My urgent 
mission is to uphold this legacy by keeping New York a place for all people, regardless of age. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Bill de Blasio 
Mayor 
 
 
Greetings,
As Deputy Mayor for Strategic Policy Initiatives, I work to help Mayor Bill de Blasio 
achieve his vision: that all New Yorkers can lead happy, healthy and productive lives. 
Working with the NYC Department for the Aging, we have made it a priority for this vision 
to apply equally to older New Yorkers – so that they may be able to thrive as they age, in 
good health; safe and secure in their homes; and able to enjoy all that New York City has to 
offer.
Age Friendly NYC was first launched in 2007 to assess the needs of older adults using the 
World Health Organization’s Global Age-Friendly Cities framework. As a result, several 
programs were developed to respond to those needs.  We have made extraordinary progress 
in making the City work for older New Yorkers.
But, on the 10th anniversary of the Age Friendly initiative, the time has come to renew that 
commitment and move our work forward. 
That is why I am so proud that the de Blasio administration is releasing Age Friendly NYC: 
New Commitments for a City For All Ages this year. The 2017 report describes our up-
dated vision for an age-friendly city.  It includes 86 initiatives spanning health and social 
services, housing, public spaces and transportation, public safety, communication and 
information, and community and civic participation. 
The wisdom and experience of older adults enrich our communities and anchor our neigh-
borhoods. With more people reaching and living beyond age 60 than ever before, it has 
become increasingly important to make sure this growing population has the supports and 
resources they need to thrive in the City they have helped to make great.
When the City becomes fairer and more inclusive, we all benefit.
Sincerely,
Richard R. Buery, Jr.,
Deputy Mayor for Strategic Policy Initiatives
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dear New Yorker: 
 
The New York City Council, together with Mayor Bill De Blasio, the New York Academy of 
Medicine and the Age-friendly Commission, has made substantial headway toward the creation 
of an age-friendly New York City.  In recent years, the City Council has spearheaded key 
legislation designed to support older adults and their families, and allow seniors to age in place in 
their homes and communities. 
 
As New York’s senior population continues to increase, it is critical that the necessary resources 
are available so seniors can remain in the City. By passing the “Year of the Senior Budget” in 
Fiscal Year 2018, the City made a strong investment in achieving this goal.  The Department for 
the Aging’s Fiscal Year 2018 budget includes a base-lined $23 million increase that will allow 
the Department to right-size its senior center budgets, eliminate the persistent waitlists for case 
management and homecare services, launch a new caregiver respite program, and provide 
weekend meals to seniors. The City Council also included $21.8 million to extend and enhance 
the City’s senior services, including NORCs, immigrant senior centers and social adult day care 
centers. 
 
Another key component of an age-friendly New York is ensuring that seniors can age in place in 
safe and functional homes.  To that end, the City Council passed a law requiring the Department 
for the Aging, in consultation with the Department of Housing Preservation and Development, to 
create and distribute an aging in place guide for building owners.  The guide, published in 2016, 
offers recommendations for ways building owners can make structural modifications that 
promote the health and well-being of senior residents and residents of all ages.  In addition, the 
City Council has supported handy person services for seniors again in the Fiscal 2018 Budget. 
 
Vital to allowing older adults to age in place is the role that unpaid caregivers play in their lives.  
Unpaid caregivers provide critical emotional, physical, and financial support to seniors, often to 
the detriment of their own needs.  These invisible workers act as a lifeline for many seniors in the 
City.  In 2016, the City Council passed legislation to gain a better understanding of who these 
caregivers are and how the City can best support them.  The results of the survey, due later this 
summer, will be used to create a comprehensive plan to address the needs of unpaid caregivers. 
 
Despite the progress the City Council has made, there is still more work to do.  The City Council 
remains committed to making New York City a city where seniors thrive.  With the help of our 
public and private partners in the City, we intend to ensure that seniors, now and in the years to 
come, can continue to call New York City home. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
MELISSA MARK-VIVERITO 
Speaker, NYC Council 
MARGARET CHIN 
Chair, Committee on Aging 
MELISSA MARK-VIVERITO 
SPEAKER 
TELEPHONE 
(212) 788-7210 
THE COUNCIL 
OF 
THE CITY OF NEW YORK 
CITY HALL 
NEW YORK, NY 10007 
To Our Fellow New Yorkers: 
We have been honored to serve as the co-chairs of the Age-friendly NYC Commission, a 
multi-sector group of esteemed leaders representing government, business, architecture, 
law, arts and culture, technology, academia, health care, and social services, charged with 
making the City the best possible place to live and work as we age. Appointed in 2010 and 
then reseated in 2015 by Mayor Bill de Blasio and City Council Speaker Melissa Mark-
Viverito, the Age-friendly NYC Commission has helped New York City become a global 
leader in the age-friendly cities movement through the development of an array of inno-
vative pilot projects to promote healthy aging and maximize physical, social and economic 
participation throughout the life course. 
With support from the New York Academy of Medicine, the Commission identifies prior-
ities grounded in feedback from older New Yorkers and forms working groups to address 
these priorities informed by the best available evidence. Past working groups launched the 
Age-friendly Local Business and Age-friendly Neighborhoods initiatives, which have been 
replicated around the world and are often cited as best practices, as well as Agefriendly-
college.org, a searchable database of educational and cultural opportunities at NYC-area 
colleges and universities. 
The Age-friendly NYC Commission’s current priorities include: 
	
• Housing: improving access to home modifications to maintain
	
   independence and safety;
	
• Primary Care: increasing utilization of preventive services among older
	
   people and enhancing the delivery of primary care to address the broader 
	
   determinants of healthy aging;
	
• Financial Wellness: promoting financial wellness as a core component of 
	
   healthy aging;
	
• Public Safety: bridging formal and informal support networks to build
	
   community and improve perceptions of safety; 
	
• Media, Arts, and Culture: catalyzing new opportunities for involvement in 
	
   arts and culture and challenging ageist assumptions. 
As we work to achieve these goals, we strive to:
	
• Maximize intergenerational engagement
	
• Ensure the equitable deployment of resources
	
• Include people with dementia and their caregivers
	
• Leverage emerging technology where appropriate   
We look forward to continued success with our City partners and hope to see  an 
age-friendly initiative in every community district in the near future. We invite you to 
consider how your personal and professional networks and activities might help to 
advance our efforts to improve the quality of life for all New Yorkers. 
Ed Lewis and Audrey Weiner
2010
1,400,000
1,420,335
17.2%
1,500,000
1,600,000
1,700,000
1,800,000
1,900,000
2,000,000
2015
2020
2025
2030
2035
2040
1,529,313
18.2%
1,641,402
19.2%
1,753,666
20.2%
1,811,866
20.5%
1,839,439
20.6%
1,860,061
20.6%
Year
Older Adult Population Growth
Female
58.3%
856,258 people 
   
Male
41.7%
613,264 people 
   
Gender
Age-Friendly Projections
=
=
Facing Frailty
Facing Poverty
Living Alone
Living Alone
28.9%
424,327 people 
   
Not Living Alone
71.1%
   
=
=
Facing Frailty
Not
Facing Frailty
25.4%
373,163 
people 
100% Poverty (CEO) 
Not Facing 
21%
300,252 
people
Employment Status
Employed
70.9%
1,041,990 people 
   
Unemployed
27.1%
398,717 people
=
=
Not in Labor Force
2.0%
28,815 people
=
Race/Ethnicity
44%
22%
22%
12%
22%
White
Asian 
Paciﬁc
Black
Hispanic
Non High School 
Grad
100000
200000
300000
400000
500000
High School 
Grad
Some College
BA or Higher
Education Level
26.6%
16.4%
29.1%
27.8%
428,208 people
408,330 people
241,634 people
391,350 people
Spanish
10000
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
140000
160000
180000
200000
220000
Chinese
Russian
Italian
French
Creole
French
Greek
Top Non-English Languages Spoken
Language
Number of People
Introduction
& History of
Age-friendly
NYC
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   1 7
INTRODUCTION
Under the leadership of Mayor Bill de Blasio, New York City has invested 
significantly in innovative programs and supports for older New 
Yorkers that truly make New York a city for all ages. 
As New Yorkers live longer, their hard-won wisdom, experience, 
skills, knowledge, productivity, energy, and insights are valuable and 
growing resources that are helping to support our families, improve 
our workplaces, and strengthen communities in all five boroughs. 
Ethnically, culturally, and economically diverse, older New Yorkers 
are a vital part of the mosaic of the City. Ensuring that New Yorkers 
can thrive as they age benefits everyone.
The de Blasio Administration has increased funding for aging services 
by more than 58 percent. That is an overall increase in the baseline 
City Tax Levy funding of more than $82 million. This increased 
funding has benefited senior centers, case management services that 
help homebound seniors, home-delivered meals, Naturally Occurring 
Retirement Communities (NORCs) that are not age-restricted 
housing locations that are home to significant concentrations of older 
adults who have aged in place, elder abuse programs, transportation 
services, and many other important services.
These critically important investments will help older residents live 
healthier and more fulfilling lives as they age in the City they love, 
continuing to contribute in myriad ways to making New York a better 
place to grow up and grow old. By 2040, one in every five New Yorkers 
will be 60 or older.   Supporting needed and cutting edge solutions 
that promote healthy aging today will enable the City to reap all of the 
benefits that tomorrow’s older residents have to offer.
HISTORY OF AGE-FRIENDLY NYC
Age-friendly NYC was launched in the fall of 2007 as a collaboration 
between the Mayor’s Office, the New York City Council (Council), and 
the New York Academy of Medicine (Academy). Age-friendly NYC 
has made great strides toward assessing the City’s responsiveness to 
the needs of older New Yorkers, developing recommendations, and 
implementing strategies that allow New York to enhance its status as 
an age-friendly city.
Age-friendly NYC builds on the work of the World Health 
Organization’s Global Age-friendly Cities initiative, which engages 
These critically important 
investments will help older 
residents live healthier and 
more fulfilling lives as they 
age in the City they love, 
continuing to contribute 
in myriad ways to making 
New York a better place to 
grow up and grow old.
 
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   1 8
older adults and other stakeholders in cities around the world to 
identify the core features of an age-friendly city. Using the Global 
Age-friendly Cities framework, the City and the Academy conducted 
a comprehensive assessment of the age-friendliness of New York 
City. Throughout 2008 and 2009, the City and the Academy engaged 
older New Yorkers, City agencies, and leaders from the private, non-
profit, and academic sectors to learn how the City could improve the 
quality of life of older residents. In August 2009, in response to their 
findings, the City announced 59 initiatives to make New York City 
more age-friendly.
The City joined with the Academy to seat the Age-friendly NYC 
Commission in 2010. The Commission—comprised of leaders in the 
business, education, civic, and non-profit sectors, among others—
was charged with making recommendations on how the City might 
partner with these sectors and leverage their resources to enhance 
our age-friendly efforts. In 2015, Mayor de Blasio announced the 
seating of 22 new members of the Age-friendly NYC Commission. 
Through this public-private partnership, Age-friendly NYC builds 
upon continuing initiatives, such as the City’s CityBench program 
to increase the amount of public seating on NYC streets and Senior 
Splash that reserves public pool hours exclusively for older adults and 
offers water exercise classes geared toward seniors.
Age-friendly NYC has been recognized globally: In July 2010, the 
World Health Organization named New York City the first Age-
friendly City under its new certification process. In 2013, Age-friendly 
NYC was awarded “Best Existing Age-friendly Initiative in the World” 
by the International Federation on Ageing.
Our new report, Age-friendly NYC: New Commitments for a City 
for All Ages, encompasses 86 initiatives that update our age-friendly 
plan. It communicates our ongoing success implementing initiatives 
launched in the 2009 plan and describes new endeavors to support 
New York City’s seniors.
City Initiatives
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   2 1
1) INCREASE FUNDING FOR ESSENTIAL AGING SERVICES
Mayor Bill de Blasio has made a strong commitment to aging services, 
as demonstrated by significant increases in baseline City Tax Levy 
funding for programs to support older New Yorkers. The overall 
increase of more than $82 million between the last year of the prior 
Administration and the FY ’18 budget represents a 58 percent rise in 
funding for aging services under the de Blasio Administration. This 
includes an increase of more than $27 million for the NYC Department 
for the Aging (DFTA), the City’s lead agency supporting older New 
Yorkers. This funding includes:
	
• $10.7 million to address the home-care waitlist, a program 
	
    that provides services including personal care and 
	
    housekeeping for functionally impaired older adults; 
	
• $10 million to adjust rates for senior centers to improve 
	
    service quality and accountability; 
	
• $4 million to establish a new program to support caregivers 
	
    of older adults; 
	
• $1.2 million to address the case management waitlist, 
	
    providing seniors who need assistance in developing a care 
	
    plan and arranging for them to receive supportive DFTA-
	
    funded services; and 
	
• $1.2 million to provide weekend meals to senior center 
	
   participants or home-delivered meals recipients. 
In addition to this increased funding, Mayor de Blasio has made 
numerous additional investments that will directly benefit older New 
Yorkers. For example, he has fought to expand the affordable senior 
housing commitment to 15,000 units and to raise the household 
income eligibility level for the Senior Citizen Homeowner Exemption 
(SCHE) from $37,400 to $58,400, contingent upon legislative 
approval. The SCHE program provides a property tax exemption 
for senior citizens who own one, two, or three family homes, 
condominiums, or cooperative apartments. This alone would benefit 
approximately 30,000 households in New York City. 
The NYC Council has also allocated more than $20 million in 
discretionary funding annually in recent fiscal years to various 
initiatives to improve the lives of older people, such as enriching 
senior center programs serving immigrant populations, providing 
services to older LGBT residents in every borough, increasing arts 
HEALTH & SOCIAL SERVICES
The overall increase of 
more than $82 million 
between the last year of 
the prior Administration 
and the FY ’18 budget 
represents a 58 percent 
rise in funding for aging 
services under the de 
Blasio Administration.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   2 2
opportunities for senior center participants, and expanding Naturally 
Occurring Retirement Community (NORC) services. NORCs are 
residential locations—single buildings, housing developments, or 
clusters of buildings within a neighborhood—that are neither age-
restricted nor built specifically for older adults, but have become 
home to significant concentrations of older adults.
2) SUPPORT KINSHIP CAREGIVER FAMILIES WITH HIGH NEEDS
The Mayor’s Action Plan for Neighborhood Safety (MAP), launched 
in July 2014, is a coordinated effort between 10 different City 
agencies to improve public safety for residents at the 15 NYC Housing 
Authority (NYCHA) developments with some of the highest rates 
of violent crime in our City, all of which house senior tenants. As 
part of this effort, DFTA’s Grandparent Resource Center (GRC) 
provides information, assistance, and supportive services to those 
older adults who are raising grandchildren and other young relatives 
in the 15 NYCHA developments. Through this initiative, GRC 
Community Advocates work with residents and kinship caregivers 
for children under 18 years old, providing information, education, 
trainings, and peer support. The program also serves as a resource 
link for senior NYCHA residents to access services for older adults. 
The GRC Community Advocates establish support groups, conduct 
workshops on safety and senior issues, and provide case assistance 
to NYCHA senior residents. About 760 seniors and caregivers living 
in the NYCHA developments have already attended workshops on 
community safety, mental health awareness, senior scams, nutrition, 
falls prevention, and child/elder abuse.
MAP, led by the Mayor’s Office of Criminal Justice, is based on the 
premise that while law enforcement and police are a critical first 
response in reducing violent crime, improving safety is also about 
improving infrastructure, matching effective programs to individuals 
and families most in need, and strengthening our neighborhoods. The 
NYCHA developments included in this initiative are Butler, Castle 
Hill, and Patterson in the Bronx; Boulevard, Brownsville, Bushwick, 
Ingersoll, Red Hook, Tompkins, and Van Dyke in Brooklyn; Polo 
Grounds, St. Nicholas, and Wagner in Manhattan; Queensbridge in 
Queens; and Stapleton in Staten Island.
3)  PRESERVE FEDERAL TITLE XX FUNDING FOR CRITICAL SENIOR CENTER
     PROGRAMS
The de Blasio Administration joined with elected officials and senior 
advocates in successfully leading opposition to a proposed reduction 
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   2 3
in Federal Title XX funding that would have had devastating 
consequences for senior center programs that are a lifeline for many 
older New Yorkers. Federal Title XX funding refers to Title XX of the 
Social Security Act, also referred to as the Social Services Block Grant, 
and allows for federal funds to be made available to states to provide 
community-based care for the elderly, the disabled, and children. 
New York State (NYS) receives $98 million in Federal Title XX 
funding annually, which is allocated to counties. Of this amount, 
$66 million funds Adult Protective and Domestic Violence Services, 
$5 million supports training activities for County and State staff, 
and $27 million is allocated to all other services, which counties 
can use at their discretion to fund a variety of allowable programs. 
The NYS Executive Budget for State FY ’18 proposed requiring that 
the entire $27 million in Title XX discretionary funding be used to 
support child care subsidy costs. As a result, DFTA would have lost 
its Title XX discretionary allocation of $17 million. In New York 
City, Title XX funding supports critical senior center programs, 
including congregate meals, case assistance, information services, 
health promotion activities, education and recreation programs, and 
transportation. The reduction of Title XX funding would have had a 
serious impact on older New Yorkers: 65 neighborhood senior centers 
across the City – representing 26 percent of the DFTA senior center 
network – were at risk, and 6,000 seniors per day would have lost vital 
nutrition, health promotion, and socialization services. As a result of 
strong opposition, the proposed reduction in Title XX funding did not 
pass in the final NYS Executive Budget for State FY ’18.
4) EXPAND THE RIGHT TO PAID SICK LEAVE
The first bill Mayor de Blasio signed into law in 2014 extended the 
right to paid sick leave to half a million more New Yorkers. The law 
took effect on April 1, 2014 and applies to all workers at businesses 
with five or more employees, encompassing many excluded under 
the previous legislation that applied to businesses with 15 or more 
workers. Under the expanded Paid Sick Leave Law, grandparents, 
grandchildren, and siblings were added to the definition of family 
members whom workers can legally care for using paid sick time. Also, 
the Paid Sick Leave Law eliminated the previous phase-in period, 
which would have delayed coverage to workers at businesses that 
employ between 15 and 20 workers. As a result, 140,000 people who 
would have waited until mid-2015 for coverage had the right to paid 
sick leave as of April 2014. Approximately 85,000 of those 140,000 
workers did not have a single paid sick day prior to the enactment of 
the expanded legislation. The NYC Department of Consumer Affairs 
The first bill Mayor de 
Blasio signed into law in 
2014 extended the right 
to paid sick leave to half a 
million more New Yorkers.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   2 4
(DCA) enforces the Paid Sick Leave Law and launched a multi-phased 
public education and outreach campaign to help employers and 
employees understand their responsibilities and rights. The Paid Sick 
Leave Law is a lifeline for New Yorkers caring for an aging relative, or 
for aging New Yorkers caring for a relative.
5) SURVEY THE NEEDS OF UNPAID CAREGIVERS
In New York City, approximately 1.3 million individuals are unpaid 
caregivers, providing care for family members who are chronically 
ill, disabled, or aged.2  This number could be much larger, given that 
people often do not think of themselves as caregivers when they 
assist family members by running errands, paying bills, preparing 
meals, picking up medications, helping with dressing, and more. 
The average time spent in providing care is more than 24 hours per 
week: essentially, a second job.3  Nearly one in four caregivers spends 
41 hours or more per week providing care.4  The economic value of 
these unpaid caregivers—should these services be provided by paid 
caregivers—is an estimated $470 billion per year.  
In August 2016, Mayor de Blasio signed legislation requiring DFTA to 
survey unpaid caregivers and caregiver service providers throughout 
New York City to help inform a comprehensive plan to address the 
needs of unpaid caregivers in the City. The legislation, Local Law 97, 
was introduced by NYC Council Aging Committee Chair Margaret 
Chin, Council Member Debi Rose, and Speaker Melissa Mark-
Viverito. Westat, a research firm, was hired to conduct the survey by 
collecting information from caregivers of the frail elderly, adults with 
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   2 5
disabilities, and dependent young relatives. DFTA, the Mayor’s Office 
of Operations, and Westat have met with providers who represent 
the specified caregiver populations. DFTA developed the survey 
with Westat, based on input from the Mayor’s Office for People with 
Disabilities (MOPD), the NYC Administration for Children’s Services, 
and community providers. Surveys were administered this spring 
and findings and recommendations will be issued this summer. 
The comprehensive plan will be developed in consultation with the 
NYC Human Resources Administration (HRA), MOPD, the NYC 
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DOHMH), academic 
experts, service providers, advocates, and other stakeholders.
6) ENSURE QUALITY SOCIAL ADULT DAY CARE PROGRAMMING 
Social adult day care (SADC) is a structured program that offers a 
protective setting to functionally impaired individuals with either 
a cognitive or physical frailty. Generally, these programs provide 
socialization opportunities, structured activities, personal care, meals, 
supervision, and monitoring. Additional SADC services may include 
activities designed to maintain and improve daily living skills, 
transportation, caregiver assistance, and case coordination. The 
environment for operating SADC programs has changed recently. The 
authorization of social adult day care as a Medicaid-covered benefit 
available through Managed Long-Term Care (MLTC) plans has led 
to many new SADC programs opening throughout the five boroughs. 
DFTA currently monitors 10 social adult day care programs that are 
supported by Council discretionary funding. The vast majority of 
SADC providers, however, are being paid by MLTC plans through the 
State Medicaid program. Thus, the NYS Department of Health and 
not DFTA, has oversight over most SADC programs.
Local Law 9 of 2015, introduced by NYC Council Aging Committee 
Chair Margaret Chin, required all SADC programs operating within 
New York City to register with DFTA, established civil penalties for 
violations of NYS Office for the Aging (NYSOFA) social adult day 
program regulations, and designated DFTA as the SADC Ombuds 
Office to receive comments and complaints with respect to SADCs. 
Since July 2015, DFTA began accepting SADC registrations and, 
as of June 2017, more than 330 sites have registered. In order to 
implement this law, DFTA has successfully developed relationships 
with relevant governmental entities. On the City level, these 
agencies include the Fire Department (FDNY), the Department of 
Buildings, the Department of Transportation (DOT), DOHMH, and 
the Human Rights Commission (CCHR). Partners on the State level 
include NYSOFA, the Office of the Medicaid Inspector General, the 
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   2 6
Department of Health, and the Office of the Attorney General. Our 
intergovernmental partners have worked closely with DFTA’s SADC 
Ombuds Office, as their assistance is key in addressing complaints 
received outside of DFTA’s purview and expertise.
7) CONDUCT AN IMPACT ANALYSIS OF SENIOR CENTER PARTICIPATION 
DFTA commissioned Fordham University to conduct an impact 
analysis to understand whether and how participation in senior 
center activities impacts the overall health and well-being of 
older New Yorkers. The 2016 study followed older adults who 
were participants in Neighborhood Senior Centers (NCs) and 
Innovative Senior Centers (ISCs), as well as older adults who had 
not participated in a senior center for at least one year. The NC 
is a type of senior center model that provides congregate meals; 
recreational, cultural, and health promotion activities; social 
services counseling; and benefits assistance. The ISC model is a 
more enhanced senior center model that provides robust health 
and wellness programming, mental health support, educational and 
socialization activities, and cultural and technology opportunities. 
In addition, some ISCs are designed to meet the needs of visually 
impaired older adults and LGBT seniors. Findings indicated that 
both ISC and NC members are achieving positive outcomes.6  Senior 
center participants reported improved physical and mental health, 
increased participation in health programs, frequent exercising, 
and positive behavior change in monitoring weight and keeping 
physically active.7  Participation in a senior center also helped to 
reduce social isolation.8  The study also found that participants often 
have the lowest incomes, the fewest resources, the poorest health, 
the greatest social isolation, and the most need for services.9  These 
senior center members experience improved physical and mental 
Senior center participants 
reported improved 
physical and mental health, 
increased participation 
in health programs, 
frequent exercising, and 
positive behavior change 
in monitoring weight and 
keeping physically active.7 
Participation in a senior 
center also helped to 
reduce social isolation.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   2 7
health not only in the time period after joining a senior center but 
even one year later.10  This is a very important finding, given the 
decline in health and social activity in this age group, especially 
among those with low incomes.11  Participants cited socialization, 
educational programs, congregate meals, recreational activities, and 
exercise programs as the most common reasons for attending senior 
centers.12 
8) RIGHT-SIZE SENIOR CENTERS
We are also working to ensure that all senior centers, which currently 
operate with varied levels of funding, have the resources they need to 
provide the kind and quality of programs that lead to these positive 
impacts. The impact analysis of senior center participation conducted 
by Fordham University in 2016 is one key dimension of this effort. 
The agency’s objective is to make each of its 246 senior centers and 
29 affiliated satellites a center of excellence. To accomplish this goal, 
DFTA is performing an extensive analysis with the NYC Office of 
Management of Budget to determine how to achieve greater funding 
parity among senior centers while promoting uniformly strong 
programming over time.
9) EXPAND THE INNOVATIVE SENIOR CENTER NETWORK
In 2014, the ISC network expanded from 10 to 16 programs citywide, 
providing a tremendous enhancement to the infrastructure of 
community-based senior services. The 16 ISCs include the nation’s first-
ever senior centers with programming specifically for the LGBT and 
visually impaired communities. Beginning in FY ’15, the Administration 
baselined a $2.3 million increase in funding for the six additional 
ISCs. ISCs have demonstrated the capacity of the senior center system 
to meet the demand for more comprehensive programming within 
the communities they serve. With additional hours, expansion of 
programming, use of technology, community partnerships, and shared 
resources, ISC services have reached a broader, more diverse audience 
of older New Yorkers, including those on the younger end of the 
spectrum.    
10) ADDRESS THE NEEDS OF LGBT OLDER ADULTS
LGBT older adults remain one of the most invisible and at-risk 
populations in the nation – they are often severely isolated and 
disconnected from services.13  Statistics indicate that LGBT older 
people are twice as likely to live alone as other seniors; half as likely 
to have life partners or significant others; and more than four times 
more likely to have no children to help them.14  LGBT older adults are 
often isolated from their families since coming out, and are half as 
LGBT older adults are often 
isolated from their families 
since coming out, and 
are half as likely to have 
close relatives to depend 
on for help.  As a result, 
about 25 percent of LGBT 
older people do not have a 
support system in case of 
an emergency.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   2 8
likely to have close relatives to depend on for help.15  As a result, about 
25 percent of LGBT older people do not have a support system in case 
of an emergency.16  Because of their lack of support networks, LGBT 
older adults are more likely than their heterosexual counterparts to 
rely on service providers for care and assistance as they age.17  And 
they are more likely to face discrimination in relation to their sexual 
orientation and gender identity when accessing health care and social 
services.18 
DFTA has done much work to address the needs of LGBT older 
adults. In addition to sponsoring the first senior center in the nation 
that provides services specifically for the LGBT population, DFTA 
conducts trainings for case management, senior center, and NORC 
program staff on working with LGBT older adults. The NYC Council, 
spearheaded by Council Member Ritchie Torres, Speaker Melissa 
Mark-Viverito, and the LGBT Caucus, funded Services and Advocacy 
for GLBT Elders to expand LGBT senior center programming 
throughout the five boroughs of New York City. In addition, DFTA 
funds a citywide program that serves the LGBT caregiving community.
11) EMBED MENTAL HEALTH PRACTITIONERS IN SENIOR CENTERS
First Lady Chirlane McCray released ThriveNYC: A Mental Health 
Roadmap for All, the most comprehensive mental health plan of any 
city or state in the nation, in November 2015. As part of ThriveNYC, 
mental health practitioners were embedded in 15 DFTA-sponsored 
senior centers citywide. Each month, between 1,500 and 2,200 
seniors attend engagement activities, such as mindfulness meditation 
sessions and psychoeducational groups at the 15 senior centers. 
Geriatric mental health services will expand to 10 more sites starting 
in July 2017.
 
12) COMBAT SOCIAL ISOLATION THROUGH FRIENDLY VISITING
An estimated one in five adults over the age of 50 is affected by 
social isolation,19  and recent research shows that the negative health 
consequences of chronic isolation and loneliness may be especially 
harmful for older adults.20  As part of ThriveNYC, DFTA established 
An estimated one in five 
adults over the age of 
50 is affected by social 
isolation. 
Living Alone
Living Alone
28.9%
424,327 people 
   
Not Living Alone
71.1%
   
=
=
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   2 9
a Friendly Visiting Program within its contracted case management 
agencies. DFTA oversees 21 case management contracts covering all 
59 Community Districts. Through the Friendly Visiting Program, 
services are available to case management contracts through two 
paths: 
	
1) The launch of new programs, operated directly by case
	
     management agencies; and 
	
2) The expansion of the existing City meals on Wheels  friendly 	     
	
     visiting program. 
  This program aims to reduce social isolation and enhance vital social 
connections. It also seeks to help identify more intensive physical and 
mental health needs, in which case, the program will connect clients 
to higher level intervention. Case management clients who are socially 
isolated are paired with trained volunteers who visit the clients 
regularly. Volunteer coordinators at case management programs 
recruit, train, and supervise volunteers. Additionally, separate guides 
were developed and distributed to assist both Friendly Visiting 
Program administrators and volunteers. Currently, more than 450 
homebound older adults are receiving friendly visiting services and 
more than 1,000 visits have occurred.
13) ADDRESS THE MENTAL HEALTH NEEDS OF ELDER ABUSE VICTIMS
Elder abuse victims have among the highest rates of severe depression 
and anxiety, and these mental health challenges often reduce the ability 
of victims to take steps necessary to seek help for elder abuse and neglect. 
Providing Options to Elderly Clients Together (PROTECT) is a program 
Providing Options to 
Elderly Clients Together 
(PROTECT) is a program 
that supports victims of 
elder abuse and neglect 
and helps them address 
their mental health issues, 
which in turn makes 
it more likely that the 
clients are able to deal 
successfully with abusive 
situations.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   3 0
that supports victims of elder abuse and neglect. Developed by DFTA 
and Weill Cornell Medical Center, PROTECT helps victims address their 
mental health issues, which in turn makes it more likely that the clients are 
able to deal successfully with abusive situations. DFTA, in coordination 
with the Mayor’s Office to Combat Domestic Violence (OCDV), will work 
with its elder abuse services and other providers to identify people in 
need, and services will be available in English and Spanish, the languages 
spoken by the majority of identified elder abuse victims. OCDV and DFTA 
are also partners on the NYC Domestic Violence Task Force, launched 
by Mayor de Blasio in November 2016, and PROTECT is included in the 
recommendations issued by the task force. The FY ’18 budget for DFTA 
includes an additional $225,000 in baseline funding for PROTECT.
14)  INCREASE THE AVAILABILITY OF MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES  TO 
       HOMEBOUND OLDER ADULTS
In an effort to increase the availability of geriatric mental health 
services, outreach models of care were developed to provide services 
where older adults reside or spend a significant amount of time, such 
as the Program to Encourage Active, Rewarding Lives for Seniors 
(PEARLS), designed by researchers at the University of Washington. 
In 2016, nine contracts were awarded to New York City organizations 
to deploy the evidence-based PEARLS model of depression care in 
the City. PEARLS providers work with people aged 65 and older with 
a special focus on those who are homebound. The key components 
of the PEARLS approach are problem solving treatment, social and 
physical activation, and pleasant activity scheduling. Depression 
often remains undiagnosed and untreated in older people, leading to 
a loss of physical, social, and mental functioning and increasing levels 
of disability. Evidence has shown that PEARLS reduces depressive 
symptoms and improves quality of life in older adults during six to 
eight in-home sessions. PEARLS services are free of charge.
15) IMPLEMENT MENTAL HEALTH FIRST AID TRAINING FOR SENIOR 
      SERVICES STAFF AND VOLUNTEERS
Mental Health First Aid (MHFA) is a groundbreaking public education 
program designed to equip non-mental health professionals with the 
knowledge needed to identify, understand, and respond to signs of 
mental health and substance abuse challenges and crises. Through 
DOHMH, several DFTA staff have been trained in this technique. 
In turn, they are providing Mental Health First Aid training to case 
managers, senior center staff, and volunteers within DFTA’s provider 
network. Participants have attested to the value of the training in 
improving their ability to spot potentially crippling mental health 
issues. DFTA will require the staff of its contracted service providers 
to receive Mental Health First Aid training.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   3 1
16) ENHANCE THE CASE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
Enhancing the case management system has been a priority for the de 
Blasio Administration. Case management is the entry point for DFTA-
funded, in-home services such as home-delivered meals and home 
care. All clients receiving an in-home service funded by DFTA receive 
a comprehensive assessment from a case management agency. Case 
managers provide assessments to identify the strengths and needs of 
older persons, and work with clients to plan and coordinate services 
and resources on their behalf. In FY ‘16, nearly 33,000 older New 
Yorkers received 535,000 hours of case management, an increase of 
17 percent compared to the previous year. This was the result of an 
investment in expanded case management staffing in order to meet 
the high demand for services.
An additional $2.6 million was baselined in FY ’15 to strengthen the 
case management system and to support the reduction of caseloads. 
A 2014 Fordham University study, commissioned by DFTA, 
determined that caseload sizes should average 65 per case manager 
and this funding has helped bring caseloads down to an average of 
65 per case manager from nearly 80 per case manager. Also, the 
Administration added $4.8 million in FY ’17 and $7.3 million starting 
in FY ’18 to stabilize staffing for case management programs by 
significantly raising salaries of case managers and their supervisors. 
This increased funding has resulted in more competitive salaries, 
which helps reduce high turnover rates and improves service delivery 
by hiring and retaining professionally qualified staff to ensure greater 
continuity of care.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   3 2
17) ASSIST LOW-INCOME OLDER ADULTS WITH BILL PAYMENT TASKS
Many case management clients face eviction, utility shut-offs, or 
financial exploitation. In response, DFTA instituted a Bill Payer 
Program to improve the financial security of frail, low-income 
seniors. Modeled after LiveOn NY’s five-year demonstration project, 
the program screens and trains volunteers to assist low-income 
older adults with monthly bill payment tasks. The volunteers meet 
one-on-one with seniors in their own homes to help them organize 
documents, create and follow a budget, balance their checkbooks, 
and write checks. The participating seniors sign the checks and make 
all financial decisions. Seniors served by the Bill Payer Program 
typically live alone and without regular supports. Some are also 
visually impaired. The program accepts referrals from DFTA-funded 
case management agencies as well as other community-based 
organizations, NORC programs. Bill Payer Program staff also follow 
up as needed to coordinate services with assigned case managers or 
social workers and to support the volunteers.
18) ASSESS THE HOME-DELIVERED MEALS PROGRAM
The home-delivered meals (HDML) program sponsored by DFTA 
provides approximately 18,000 meals per day to homebound older 
adults through 23 contracts with 17 community-based organizations. 
DFTA is partnering with PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) to identify 
how the City can improve the efficiency and quality of the program. 
The vision is to build capacity and improve food service delivery 
across the City by broadening menu options, improving consumer 
choice, increasing program efficiency, controlling costs, leveraging 
technology, and meeting the nutritional needs of diverse constituents. 
PwC engaged HDML stakeholders in New York City and nationally 
to pinpoint what works well and what needs improvement. After 
extensive interviews, analysis, and fieldwork, PwC presented its 
findings to DFTA. DFTA is analyzing these results, which will inform 
the retooling of the HDML program.
19) ADDRESS THE DIETARY NEEDS OF SENIORS
To help senior centers and home-delivered meal programs create 
nutritious meals that are tailored to meet the diverse needs of older 
New Yorkers, DFTA developed the Simple Servings online tool. Simple 
Servings is a database of more than 1,000 recipes – and growing 
– that meet City and State nutritional standards and are culturally 
relevant to participants. DFTA is working on enhancements to Simple 
Servings to allow the creation of menus that address the specialized 
dietary needs of older adults with health conditions, such as diabetes 
and hypertension.  
The home-delivered 
meals (HDML) program 
sponsored by DFTA 
provides approximately 
18,000 meals per day to 
homebound older adults.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   3 3
20)  IMPROVE OLDER NEW YORKERS’ ACCESS TO THE SUPPLEMENTAL  
       NUTRITION ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
Poverty among older adults is a deeply entrenched problem in New 
York City. Although more than 700,000 New Yorkers over the age of 
55 have incomes low enough to qualify for public benefits that help 
meet their basic needs, these programs are chronically underutilized. 
As a result, each year vulnerable older adults are leaving millions 
of dollars on the table that could help them achieve stability. In 
September 2014, Benefits Data Trust (BDT) launched the NY Benefits 
Center in partnership with The Robin Hood Foundation and HRA to 
increase low-income seniors’ access to public benefits across all five 
boroughs. Initially, the campaign focused just on the Supplemental 
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), and in 2015 it expanded 
to include multiple benefits, including Medicaid, Home Energy 
Assistance Program, and the Senior Citizen Rent Increase Exemption. 
In the nearly three years since its inception, the NY Benefits Center 
has achieved significant success: To date, BDT has mailed outreach 
letters to 249,000 individual older adult households and has helped 
more than 26,500 low-income older New Yorkers apply for one or 
more benefits, including nearly 20,000 applications for SNAP.
According to HRA, nearly 25 
percent of the 1.7 million 
New Yorkers currently 
receiving SNAP are over 
60 years old. Nationally, 42 
percent of all older adults 
participate in the SNAP 
program. Among older 
New Yorkers, however, that 
figure has now climbed to 
approximately 70 percent.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   3 4
According to HRA, nearly 25 percent of the 1.7 million New Yorkers 
currently receiving SNAP are over 60 years old. Nationally, 42 percent 
of all older adults participate in the SNAP program. Among older 
New Yorkers, however, that figure has now climbed to approximately 
70 percent.
Since the start of HRA’s SNAP Helps campaign in April 2015 and its 
companion website FoodHelp.nyc, approximately 117,000 clients 
have received assistance. The SNAP Helps campaign encourages New 
Yorkers struggling to afford food to seek help, targeting low-income 
older adults and immigrants. FoodHelp.nyc redirects potential clients 
to ACCESS NYC where they are able to determine if they qualify for 
more than 30 different City, State, and Federal benefits.
21) PROVIDE UNIQUE FOOD SERVICE PROGRAMS AVAILABLE TO SENIORS
The NYC Department of Probation (DOP), in partnership with Food 
Bank For New York City and the Mayor’s Fund to Advance New York 
City, currently operates Neighborhood Opportunity Network (NeON) 
Nutrition Kitchens in each of the five boroughs. NeON is a network 
of community organizations, government agencies, local businesses, 
and community residents focused on connecting probation clients 
who live in the target neighborhood to opportunities, resources, and 
services. The high cost of food, utilities, and rent can be crippling, 
causing more and more households and individuals, including older 
New Yorkers, to seek emergency food. For people on probation 
in need, pride and stigmatization often discourage them from 
seeking help at community-based soup kitchens and food pantries. 
Yet, they feel comfortable coming to NeON Nutrition Kitchens. 
These kitchens provide healthy recipes, nutrition information, and 
cooking demonstrations. They also distribute food to DOP clients 
to improve clients’ understanding of a healthy lifestyle and connect 
our communities to a critical service. This response has grown into a 
community-wide initiative and a sustainable solution to combat food 
poverty, and many older adults have participated in NeON Nutrition 
Kitchens.
22) AMPLIFY AWARENESS OF FOOD INSECURITY AMONG OLDER ADULTS
DFTA, together with the NYC Office of the Director of Food Policy, has 
focused on the pressing issue of food insecurity among older adults. 
Many older New Yorkers are forced to choose between paying for 
food, rent, medication, and other necessities. The Aging in New York 
Fund—the non-profit arm of DFTA—has organized public forums 
in the Bronx, Brooklyn, Manhattan, and Queens to raise awareness 
about food insecurity among older New Yorkers and to recommend 
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   3 5
solutions. In partnership with other non-profit organizations, each 
forum features panelists who discuss community programs that 
address the issue of food insecurity.
23)  INCREASE EVIDENCE-BASED HEALTH PROGRAMMING IN THE
       AGING SERVICES NETWORK
Senior centers and Naturally Occurring Retirement Communities 
citywide now offer national evidence-based programs that promote 
health and reduce the prevalence of disease among older adults. 
These programs are based on research and provide documented 
health benefits. Such programs include: A Matter of Balance, to 
prevent falls; Tai Chi for Arthritis, to improve movement, balance, 
and strength; Stay Active and Independent for Life, to reduce fall risk 
factors; and the Chronic Disease Self-Management Program, to build 
self-confidence in participants to maintain their health and manage 
their chronic health conditions, such as diabetes, heart disease, and 
hypertension. Additionally, approximately 300 older adults conduct 
health promotion programming for their peers at senior centers and 
other venues throughout the City each month. An average of 20,000 
individuals per month participate in volunteer-led health programs, 
such as the STAY WELL exercise program to improve balance, 
cardiovascular health, and muscle strength; and the Keep on Track 
blood pressure monitoring program.
24) FACILITATE ACCESS TO PRIMARY CARE
The New York Academy of Medicine is coordinating the Age-friendly 
NYC Commission’s Primary Care Working Group, which has launched 
an educational campaign to promote the Annual Wellness Visit – an 
underutilized Medicare benefit – in partnership with the Medicare 
Rights Center. For Medicare beneficiaries, the Annual Wellness Visit 
is a yearly doctor’s visit to create a personalized prevention plan to 
help older adults stay healthy. This free visit includes vaccinations, 
screenings, falls risk assessments, and advice and referrals to 
maintain health and wellness. The working group is also organizing 
a symposium in partnership with Healthfirst, which will address how 
Facing Poverty
Facing Poverty
21%
300,252 people 
   
Not Facing Poverty
79%
   
=
=
21% of older New Yorkers 
are facing poverty.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   3 6
age-friendly primary care and a focus on wellness can help to address 
the broader determinants of health for older people and improve 
health outcomes.
25) PROVIDE EVIDENCE-BASED GERIATRIC CARE
NYC Health + Hospitals is the largest public health care system in the 
nation, serving more than 1 million New Yorkers annually, including 
many older adults, in approximately 70 patient care locations 
citywide. It is comprised of a network of 11 hospitals, trauma centers, 
neighborhood health centers, nursing homes, and post-acute care 
centers. Each of NYC Health + Hospitals’ 11 acute care hospitals has 
received Nurses Improving Care for Healthsystem Elders (NICHE) 
designation. NICHE is the leading nurse-driven program designed 
to address the complex needs of older adults. The program provides 
the principles, education, and tools to support health care systems 
in transforming and achieving patient-centered care. Each hospital 
in the NYC Health + Hospitals network went through an extensive 
education and training process. Across the system, more than 500 
registered nurses have been trained to enhance their geriatric care 
skills and knowledge. Sites must continue to show how they are 
advancing the care provided to older adults and other programmatic 
improvements to sustain designation. There are four NICHE 
program implementation levels – Early, Progressive, Senior Friendly, 
and Exemplar – and hospitals under NYC Health + Hospitals range 
from Early to Exemplar. This exemplifies the City’s commitment 
to improving care to meet the needs of older adults across the care 
continuum.
26)  LAUNCH STATE-OF-THE-ART ACUTE CARE FOR THE ELDERLY
       HOSPITAL UNIT
In 2017, NYC Health + Hospitals/Harlem will open the Dr. Muriel 
Petioni Geriatrics Center of Excellence. This state-of-the-art Acute 
Care for the Elderly unit, designed to meet the special needs of older 
adults, will provide a coordinated continuum of medical and support 
services for older adults. The Center will be staffed by specially 
trained providers and will have eight inpatient beds, a community 
activity/therapy room, and a rehabilitation gym for physical therapy. 
The unit has safety features including safety hand rails to prevent 
falls and color-signed hallways to encourage walking and help people 
find their way. Patient rooms have special lighting to ease anxiety and 
reduce glare. Beds will have low-height settings and bathrooms will 
accommodate walkers and wheelchairs and provide commodes with 
elevated seating.
NYC Health + Hospitals is 
the largest public health 
care system in the nation, 
serving more than 1 million 
New Yorkers annually, 
including many older 
adults, in approximately 
70 patient care locations 
citywide.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   3 7
The inpatient day room is equipped with comfortable seating to 
encourage socialization and participation in activity-based therapy 
sessions such as art, music, and other programs designed to promote 
cognitive functioning and prevent functional decline. Similarly, the 
Rehabilitation Medicine gym will be equipped to provide older adult 
patients with physical therapy to prevent deconditioning and muscle 
atrophy during their hospital stays. The gym will also be used for 
activities, classes, and programs designed to increase activity among 
older adults. The programs and activities include an Alzheimer’s 
caregiver program, a walking club for older adults, Tai Chi and Qigong 
workshops, and a dance program.
27) REDUCE AVOIDABLE HOSPITAL READMISSIONS
DFTA partnered with NYC Health + Hospitals for its Delivery System 
Reform Incentive Payment Program (DSRIP) initiative, which is part 
of the NYS Medicaid Reform effort. The key DSRIP objective is to 
reduce avoidable hospital readmissions by 25 percent over five years. 
DFTA’s role is to provide support and monitoring of the two providers 
for the care transitions program: New York Foundation for Senior 
Citizens, paired with NYC Health + Hospitals/Elmhurst, and Selfhelp 
Community Services, paired with NYC Health + Hospitals/Queens. 
The two providers will follow and support patients at high risk for 
readmission for 30 days after they are discharged. In spring 2017, 
both teams started working at their assigned hospitals and visiting 
patients in the community.
28) LEAD CITYWIDE FALLS PREVENTION INITIATIVE
Falls are common among older New Yorkers and are a leading cause 
of hospitalizations.21  In light of this fact, the NYC Falls Prevention 
Coalition was established, co-led by DOHMH and DFTA. The 
coalition aims to promote and implement proven and promising 
strategies to reduce the incidence and burden of falls among older 
adults. The coalition regularly convenes multi-sectoral partners to 
foster collaborations and leverage resources toward achieving shared 
goals; serves as an information and resource hub for evidence-based 
falls prevention tools and programs for all New Yorkers, including 
More than 
18,000
hospitalizations
Nearly
33,000
emergency 
department vists.
43% 
of falls patients are 
dischraged to skilled 
nursing facilities.
Nearly 
300
deaths
NYC Department of Health and Mental Hygiene Bureau of Vital Statistics death records 2012-2014
FALLS
Falls are common among 
older New Yorkers and 
are a leading cause of 
hospitalizations
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   3 8
health and wellness professionals, older adults, and the communities 
where they live and work; and advocates for research, resources, 
programming, and policy that reduces the incidence or burden of 
falls. The coalition also spearheads activities and actions in support 
of National Falls Prevention Awareness Day.
29) CONNECT HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS TO AGING SERVICES PROVIDERS
In an effort to forge connections between the health care provider 
network and the aging provider network, DFTA has completed its 
blueprint for a program to begin drawing health care funds to expand 
aging services. The agency’s Management Services Organization 
(MSO) was established in 2016 to offer health care providers more 
holistic options to better address the needs of patients through 
programming, such as falls prevention and chronic disease self-
management classes. Through the MSO, connections between health 
care providers and DFTA-funded community services are facilitated 
with the goal of supporting older adults in living longer, healthier 
lives.
The MSO is beginning to market falls prevention programming to 
health care providers. Presently, there are 10 MSO members, all of 
whom are DFTA-funded aging services providers. The plan is for the 
MSO members to provide evidence-based falls prevention classes 
to health care consumers and receive a fee from the health care 
organizations or health plans for this work, which the aging services 
organizations can then reinvest in expanded and enriched services. 
DFTA anticipates the first inflow of health care funds to the 10 MSO 
members by the end of 2017 and is also determining additional products 
to market. The plan is to expand MSO membership in 2018 and beyond.
Through the MSO, 
connections between 
health care providers 
and DFTA-funded 
community services are 
facilitated with the goal 
of supporting older adults 
in living longer, healthier 
lives.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   3 9
30) ESTABLISH HEALTHY AGING FELLOWS SECTION
In June 2017, the New York Academy of Medicine launched a 
Healthy Aging section of the Academy Fellows to improve the health, 
well-being, and engagement of older people in cities through inter-
professional communication and networks; community/public 
advocacy; leadership development; and education, research, and 
policy involvement. Academy Fellows are distinguished professionals 
in medical and health professions and other disciplines affecting 
health, who embody the highest levels of achievement and leadership 
in urban health, elected by their peers. Fellows span a wide range 
of disciplines including medicine, nursing, social work, public 
health, administration, health policy, pharmacy, dentistry, law, and 
government, and are academics, practitioners, and policy makers 
in their fields. This Fellows section brings together physicians, 
nurses, social workers, dentists, pharmacists, nutritionists, and other 
professionals working with older people, to collaborate with Age-
friendly NYC.
31) SUPPORT SENIORS LIVING IN NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT AREAS
The NYC Department of Youth and Community Development 
administers the Federal Community Services Block Grant program 
to combat poverty and provide services to low-income people that 
empower them to become self-sufficient. The program targets 
funds to low-income communities it designates as Neighborhood 
Development Areas (NDAs). The NDA Initiative fosters community-
level engagement to ensure that services address the most pressing 
needs of each community.
NDA programs that serve New Yorkers aged 60 and older provide a 
variety of support services, including social and recreational activities, 
exercise and nutrition programs, medical assistance and community 
services. Activities include social, cultural and recreational services. 
Programs may also offer activities such as family budgeting and 
consumer education; friendly visiting; health/nutrition instruction; 
homebound services; individual/family counseling; intergenerational 
interaction; respite services; and transportation services. Older 
New Yorkers who participate attain needed benefits and services 
and demonstrate positive physical, psychological, and social well-
being. Participants are required to be NYC residents who meet the 
definition of low-income in federal income guidelines. At least 80 
percent or more of participants must live within the boundaries 
of each NDA. Using a strength-based approach, programs work in 
partnership with participants to build upon existing assets to reach 
goals. NDA programs engage a case manager to meet periodically 
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   4 0
with participants and refer participants, as needed. This year, NDA 
programs for older adults will serve about 3,600 persons in targeted 
neighborhoods across the City.
32)  IMPLEMENT NY CONNECTS TO PROVIDE COMPREHENSIVE 
       INFORMATION ON LONG-TERM CARE SERVICES
NY Connects is a statewide system that provides free, objective, and 
comprehensive information on long-term care  services and supports 
regardless of age, income, disability, or diagnosis. As the Local 
Administrative Agency for NY Connects in NYC, which launched 
in September 2015, DFTA is responsible for its oversight and 
monitoring. In this role, DFTA works with HRA, MOPD, and other 
stakeholders. Services provided by NY Connects include connecting 
clients’ families to other City and State agencies, providers, and 
programs; providing person-centered counseling; screening for 
Medicaid and assisting with benefits applications such as SNAP, 
the Senior Citizen Rent Increase Exemption (SCRIE), and Veterans 
Benefits; translation services; and making home visits if the client is 
homebound. A NY Connects office is located in each borough. Through 
NY Connects, from October 2015 through December 2016, more than 
16,000 contacts were made citywide. Approximately 10,000 of these 
contacts were from individuals seeking services, and 4,000 contacts 
were from either caregivers or professionals seeking assistance for 
clients. Thirty percent of the contacts were for housing-related issues, 
such as access to assisted living and to shelters, eviction prevention, 
application assistance for public and other subsidized housing, and 
SCRIE, and other inquires related to obtaining food, receiving home 
care and personal care assistance, health care benefits, and legal 
assistance.
A NY Connects office is 
located in each borough. 
Through NY Connects, from 
October 2015 through 
December 2016, more 
than 16,000 contacts were 
made citywide.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   4 1
33) SUPPORT AFFORDABLE SENIOR HOUSING
Older adults represent the fastest growing segment of the NYC 
population, and increasing the supply of affordable housing to meet 
their needs will become ever more important. The City has taken 
actions to promote a more secure housing future for older New 
Yorkers through the increased production of senior housing, in 
addition to enhanced housing supports and services. The Mayor’s 
Housing New York five-borough, 10-year strategy includes a plan to 
create or preserve 10,000 units of affordable senior housing for New 
Yorkers. The fixed incomes of both older adults and veterans have 
made it difficult for these vulnerable populations to keep pace with 
rising rents. Under the new benchmark announced in the Mayor’s 
2017 State of the City address, the number of apartments in the 
Mayor’s housing program dedicated to those earning between zero 
and $40,000 per year will increase by 10,000, from 40,000 units 
to 50,000 units. Of the 10,000 additional units, 5,000 will house 
older New Yorkers and 500 will serve veterans. As a result of the new 
benchmark, the City’s senior housing commitment has increased by 
5,000, to 15,000 units of the 200,000 total units in the Housing New 
York plan. To date, the NYC Department of Housing Preservation 
and Development (HPD) and the NYC Housing Development 
Corporation have financed more than 4,000 senior housing units 
under Housing New York. In addition, the City launched the Senior 
Affordable Rental Apartments program in 2014 to provide financing 
for the construction and renovation of affordable housing for low-
income older adults. The City is also funding services for older adults 
HOUSING
The City’s senior 
housing commitment 
has substantially 
increased under the de 
Blasio Administration.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   4 2
through a forthcoming request for proposals, which will be issued by 
HRA. HPD and NYCHA are partnering to develop senior housing on 
NYCHA campuses. At present, three senior housing projects have 
been awarded through joint HPD-NYCHA procurements.
Two important City initiatives have gone through the public review 
process and were approved in 2016 through the tireless efforts of 
the NYC Council, Borough Presidents, and Community Boards: 
Mandatory Inclusionary Housing (MIH) and Zoning for Quality 
and Affordability (ZQA). MIH is a pioneering initiative to ensure 
that affordable housing is mandatory and permanent wherever new 
housing capacity is approved through land use actions. Together with 
the Housing New York plan, it will yield tens of thousands of affordable 
apartments in high-quality neighborhoods, while stabilizing those 
neighborhoods for years to come. ZQA enables the construction of 
affordable senior housing that can never be converted to market-rate 
housing. By modifying requirements that once favored parking lots 
over affordable housing, ZQA makes buildings for older New Yorkers 
more financially feasible and allows for improved community and 
outdoor spaces for tenants.
34)  EXPAND ACCESS TO CIVIL JUSTICE AND TENANT LEGAL SERVICES FOR
       OLDER NEW YORKERS
In 2017, Mayor de Blasio and NYC Council Speaker Melissa Mark-
Viverito announced plans for New York City to become the first city in 
the United States to implement a universal access to counsel program 
for all tenants facing eviction in Housing Court. When fully implemented 
in five years, the City will have the largest tenant legal services program 
Access to free legal 
services to prevent 
evictions will be critical for 
older tenants, given that 
approximately 40 percent 
of older New Yorkers are 
at or below 200 percent of 
the Federal poverty level.22
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   4 3
anywhere in the country. Over the next five years, the program, led by 
the NYC Department of Social Services, will provide expanded services 
to stop unlawful evictions and prevent the displacement of individuals 
and families; serve an estimated 400,000 New Yorkers annually by 
providing universal access to legal assistance for all tenants facing 
eviction; and continue to pursue cases in communities throughout the 
City where tenants are most at risk of harassment and disseminate 
information about available legal services. Tenants facing eviction with 
incomes below 200 percent of the Federal poverty level will receive 
full representation, while those earning more will receive legal advice 
and assistance. Access to free legal services to prevent evictions will be 
critical for older tenants, given that approximately 40 percent of older 
New Yorkers are at or below 200 percent of the Federal poverty level.22
35)  INCREASE OUTREACH FOR THE SENIOR CITIZEN RENT INCREASE
       EXEMPTION PROGRAM
The NYC Rent Freeze Program, otherwise known as the Senior Citizen 
Rent Increase Exemption and Disability Rent Increase Exemption 
(DRIE), freezes the rent for approximately 70,000 seniors and 
people with disabilities. In 2014, Mayor de Blasio signed Local Laws 
19 and 39, which raised the income eligibility limit for SCRIE/DRIE 
recipients to $50,000 from $29,000, authorized in the State FY ‘15 
budget. As the enabling State legislation was scheduled to sunset, the 
State FY ’17 budget authorized the City to continue offering SCRIE/
DRIE benefits to eligible individuals earning up to $50,000 through 
2020. In 2017, the Mayor signed Local Law 24 to extend the current 
income eligibility limits of $50,000 for SCRIE and DRIE until 2020. 
Several other local laws were enacted to establish ombudspersons 
for the SCRIE and DRIE programs; provide notice to SCRIE/
DRIE tenants regarding legal regulated and preferential rents; and 
disseminate SCRIE information with other City agency applications 
to older adults. The NYC Department of Finance (DOF) also worked 
to pass important State legislation that allows current SCRIE/DRIE 
recipients to be grandfathered in for renewal applications, and 
permits household members to take over the benefit of a deceased 
tenant or a tenant who permanently leaves the household.
DOF has been focused on providing exceptional customer service for 
these programs, improving the application process, and enrolling as 
many qualified tenants into the program as possible. DOF has raised 
awareness of the program by rebranding it as the NYC Rent Freeze 
Program. In partnership with elected officials, community groups, 
and faith-based organizations, DOF has promoted these programs 
The NYC Rent Freeze 
Program, otherwise known 
as the Senior Citizen Rent 
Increase Exemption and 
Disability Rent Increase 
Exemption (DRIE), freezes 
the rent for approximately 
70,000 seniors and people 
with disabilities.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   4 4
and educated people about program requirements and how to apply. 
DOF has overhauled all of the department’s applications to make 
them easier to understand and complete. As a result, processing 
time is down to three to five days for initial applications and six to 
seven days for renewal applications. Along with increased outreach 
and the development of simpler application forms, DOF expanded 
the Manhattan walk-in center and is committed to ensuring all of 
the agency’s applications and worksites are more ADA compliant, 
including DOF’s SCRIE/DRIE walk-in centers in the Bronx and 
Brooklyn, which are scheduled to open soon.
36) REDEVELOP SITES FOR AFFORDABLE SENIOR HOUSING
The NYC Economic Development Corporation (NYCEDC) works to 
cultivate dynamic, resilient communities across all five boroughs. As 
part of its mission is to create shared prosperity throughout NYC by 
strengthening neighborhoods, NYCEDC is working on redeveloping 
two sites for senior housing projects. One project, Baychester Senior 
Living, is located in the Bronx. This 12-acre site, which has been 
primarily vacant and underutilized for more than a century, will be 
redeveloped subject to all necessary approvals and will transform 
into an exciting new development with approximately 180 units 
of affordable senior housing. These units will be integrated into a 
pedestrian-oriented, outdoor urban retail complex complemented by 
more than 2.5 acres of publicly accessible open space, as well as health, 
fitness, business, and workforce amenities. The other NYCEDC senior 
housing project is Landmark Colony on Staten Island. The 44-acre 
site, which provided room and board to economically disadvantaged 
populations until 1975, is slated to be redeveloped into a 344-unit, 
senior housing project that  includes affordable units, ancillary 
retail, and community space. Existing historic structures will either 
be rehabilitated or stabilized as arrested ruins. The project will be 
designed to connect to the Staten Island Greenbelt, a 2,800-acre 
network of open spaces. Redevelopment will transform this longtime 
vacant property into productive use as housing for older adults, the 
fastest growing segment of Staten Island’s population. Construction 
is anticipated to begin in 2018.
37) BROADEN ACCESS TO AFFORDABLE HOUSING FOR LGBT SENIORS
The City is working to increase LGBT-friendly housing and care 
options to ensure that LGBT older adults are treated with dignity 
and respect. There are two LGBT-friendly affordable senior projects 
in development at HPD, one in the Bronx and another in Brooklyn. 
Looking ahead, HPD will continue to encourage the development of 
affordable LGBT-friendly senior housing.
The City is working to 
increase LGBT-friendly 
housing and care options 
to ensure that LGBT older 
adults are treated with 
dignity and respect.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   4 5
38) EDUCATE OLDER TENANTS ABOUT THEIR RIGHTS TO FAIR  HOUSING
The NYC Commission on Human Rights is charged with the 
enforcement of the NYC Human Rights Law (NYCHRL), which is 
one of the most comprehensive civil rights laws in the nation. The 
NYCHRL provides protections in employment, housing, and public 
accommodation from discrimination based on an individual’s actual 
or perceived membership in a protected class, including race, color, 
age, national origin, disability, sexual orientation, among others. 
CCHR is also responsible for educating the public on their rights 
and responsibilities under the law and conducting public outreach 
to combat discrimination, promote understanding, and encourage 
positive community relations. The work of CCHR focuses on key 
areas of the NYC Human Rights Law, including fair and equal access 
to housing. Under the NYCHRL, discrimination in private and public 
housing, land, and commercial spaces in New York City is prohibited. 
Any person selling, renting, or leasing – including landlords, 
superintendents, building managers, brokers, and realtors – cannot 
discriminate because of a person’s actual or perceived protected 
status under the law, which includes protections for individuals from 
discrimination based on lawful source of income. Lawful source 
of income includes any Federal, State, or City public or housing 
assistance toward the payment of rent, such as Supplemental Security 
Income, Section 8, Veterans’ GI Bill, and others.
To promote fair and equal access to housing, CCHR collaborates 
with HPD on annual fair housing forums, community events, and 
tenant resource fairs to inform the public, including older adults, 
about disability access rights, combating tenant harassment, and 
lawful source of income discrimination. In addition, as part of its 
comprehensive public education efforts, CCHR does citywide media 
outreach, produces multilingual publications and materials, and 
conducts regular workshops on housing discrimination to landlords, 
real estate agents, and owners, as well as individuals, housing 
advocacy organizations, and community groups. CCHR’s Project 
Equal Access also works with community members to ensure their 
buildings are accessible for people with disabilities, and partners with 
other City agencies and local non-profits on various programs to raise 
awareness and educate residents about their rights.
  
39) EXPAND ACCESS TO THE SENIOR CITIZEN HOME OWNER EXEMPTION
The Mayor and DOF have done much work to assist seniors, veterans, 
and people with disabilities who are homeowners through the 
Senior Citizen Homeowner Exemption (SCHE) and the Disability 
Homeowner Exemption (DHE). This is the first renewal for these 
To promote fair and equal 
access to housing, CCHR 
collaborates with HPD 
on annual fair housing 
forums, community 
events, and tenant 
resource fairs to inform 
the public, including older 
adults, about disability 
access rights, combating 
tenant harassment, and 
lawful source of income 
discrimination.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   4 6
exemptions in 10 years. In advance of the application renewal 
deadline of March 15, 2017, DOF sent three reminder notices to all 
current program participants. As with any renewal process, however, 
some people may no longer qualify, and income may be a challenge 
for eligibility. In light of this, DOF is working to mitigate the impact 
through the passage of State legislation (S4628/A7463) sponsored by 
State Senator Diane Savino and Assembly Member Brian Kavanagh, 
which would increase the income ceiling for SCHE and DHE from 
$37,400 to $58,400. The Mayor announced his support for this 
legislation and proposed resources for this expansion in the FY ’18 
budget. As a result, DOF anticipates that more than 32,000 older adult 
homeowners and homeowners with disabilities would experience an 
average tax reduction of $1,752 from the expansion of SCHE and 
DHE programs.
40)  ENRICH NATURALLY OCCURRING RETIREMENT COMMUNITY
       SUPPORTIVE SERVICE PROGRAMS
Throughout the past two decades, a number of NORCs have received 
funding from City and State programs and private foundations to 
provide supportive services to older residents. These programs are 
called NORC Supportive Service Programs, or NORC programs. The 
NORC movement began right here in New York City.
DFTA-funded NORC programs are structured to promote shared 
responsibility and participation in program design and operation 
through a partnership among older NORC residents, the NORC 
housing entity, a social services provider, and a healthcare provider. 
There are five primary objectives for DFTA-funded NORC programs. 
All NORC programs should:
	
1) provide supportive environments that allow older adults 
	
    independence as they age in place;
	
2) engage residents and facilitate connections within the 
	
     community;
	
3) assess the needs of older residents;
	
4) offer supportive services based on assessments; and
	
5) build strong and meaningful communities that cultivate 
	
     new roles for community members. 
In 2014, DFTA awarded 28 NORC contracts in the Bronx, Brooklyn, 
Manhattan, and Queens; the DFTA budget for these NORC programs 
is $6.7 million. These communities are located in public housing, 
low- to moderate-income co-ops, and low- to moderate-income 
DFTA-funded NORC 
programs are structured 
to promote shared 
responsibility and 
participation in program 
design and operation 
through a partnership 
among older NORC 
residents, the NORC  
housing entity, a social 
services provider, and a 
healthcare provider.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   4 7
private rentals. The NORC contract awards included funding to 
enhance services, such as case management for homebound and non-
homebound seniors, assistance with accessing public benefits, and an 
increased emphasis on wellness, chronic disease risk assessments, 
and healthcare management. In addition, the NYC Council allocated 
a total of $3.85 million in FY ’18 to fund NORC programs, including 
$1.9 million for horizontal Neighborhood NORCs, which are typically 
found in an age-integrated neighborhood of one- and two-family 
homes as opposed to the classic NORC model that may be a single 
age-integrated apartment building, or a housing complex with multiple 
buildings.
41) DEVELOP THE CITY’S FIRST HEALTH FOCUSED COMMUNITY
The historic Sea View Hospital campus on Staten Island will be the 
City’s first health-focused, mixed-use, master-planned community to 
prevent or ameliorate chronic disease. The residential portion of the 
plan will include units set aside for older adults. The City received 
bids this spring in response to a Request for Expressions of Interest to 
redevelop the site in keeping with four evidence-based principles of 
healthy design: 1) providing access to healthy, locally sourced foods, 2) 
promoting physical activity, 3) encouraging social interaction, and 4) 
providing easy access to nature. This project follows the legacy of Sea 
View Hospital as the City’s first large-scale, full-service tuberculosis 
hospital, regarded both for the boldness of its scale and for the 
significant clinical contributions it made to the ultimate widespread 
cure of the disease.
42)  PUBLISH AN AGING IN PLACE GUIDE TO RECOMMEND  AGE-FRIENDLY
       RESIDENTIAL BUILDING UPGRADES
Local Law 51 of 2015 – introduced by NYC Council Speaker Melissa 
Mark-Viverto and Council Aging Committee Chair Margaret Chin – 
required the development of a guide for building owners regarding 
aging in place. “Aging in place” describes individuals who continue 
to live in their homes as they age rather than relocating. Research 
suggests that a majority of older people prefer to age in place23  and in 
New York City, 96 percent of older adults are currently aging in place in 
non-institutional settings.24  As people age, they become predisposed 
to multiple chronic conditions that can lead to diminished functional 
capacity. For older people to remain independent, their housing must 
accommodate their changes in ability.
DFTA issued the “Aging in Place Guide for Building Owners: 
Recommended Age-friendly Residential Building Upgrades” in 2016 
“Aging in place” describes 
individuals who continue 
to live in their homes 
as they age rather than 
relocating.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   4 8
through a collaboration with the American Institute of Architects New 
York Design for Aging Committee. The guide recommends residential 
building modifications to accommodate older tenants. By making 
these improvements, building owners can help residents remain in 
their homes as they age – safely, comfortably, and independently. 
While the recommendations are made with older adults in mind, 
many of the suggested improvements would make buildings and 
apartments more livable for residents of all ages. As provided in 
Local Law 51, the guide was developed in consultation with the NYC 
Department of Buildings, HPD, MOPD, and relevant housing experts 
from the private and non-profit sector. In addition, the Age-friendly 
NYC Commission’s Housing Working Group, coordinated by the New 
York Academy of Medicine, is assessing how older adults can access a 
number of the improvements identified in the “Aging in Place Guide 
for Building Owners.”
43) REDUCE HOUSING RELATED FALL HAZARDS FOR OLDER ADULTS 
By 2030, all City contracts for providing home-based services for 
older adults will require an assessment for fall hazards, as per the 
recommendation of DOHMH. For new construction, the City will 
promote the adoption of universal design elements, such as grab 
bars, hand rails, slip-resistant floors, and lighting that reduces the 
risks of falls. Similarly, for existing buildings, the City will provide 
incentives for in-place retrofits for measures aimed at promoting safe 
home environments and preventing falls among older adults.
44)  TRAIN PROVIDERS ON HOME-BASED HEALTH AND SAFETY TOPICS
       FOR OLDER ADULTS
DOHMH will offer a Healthy Homes for Older Adults training program 
on older adult-specific risk factors for injury and illness, and best 
practices for prevention. Topics include fire, falls, pests, heat illness, 
and medication safety. The training will be offered to health and social 
services providers who work with older adults in the home in order 
to improve their understanding of the burden of home environmental 
risks.
45)  INSTITUTE THE HOME WATER ASSISTANCE PROGRAM TO ASSIST 
       LOW-INCOME OLDER NEW YORKERS
The 
NYC 
Department 
of 
Environmental 
Protection 
(DEP) 
implemented the Home Water Assistance Program, which is an 
initiative to make water and sewer bills more affordable for low-
income homeowners, including older adults. DEP worked with 
HRA to select 12,500 qualified one- to four-family homeowners who 
received the Home Energy Assistance Program Regular Heating 
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   4 9
Benefit for the heating season. DEP later expanded the program to 
include recipients of a Regular Heating Benefit or a Senior Citizens 
Homeowners Exemption or a Disabled Homeowners Exemption. 
DEP partnered with HRA and DOF to identify more than 51,700 
qualified one- to four-family homeowners who received a $115 credit.
46)  ASSIST SENIOR HOMEOWNERS THROUGH THE BUILD IT 
       BACK PROGRAM
Build It Back was launched in 2013 to assist homeowners whose 
properties were damaged by Hurricane Sandy. Build It Back is funded 
by Federal Community Development Block Grant – Disaster Recovery 
funding, administered by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban 
Development, and is intended to serve homeowners with recovery 
needs that have not been met by other disaster assistance resources. 
Adults aged 65 and older comprise approximately 12 percent of the 
Build It Back applicant pool. However, older adults accounted for 20 
percent of residents in three of the most affected areas.
Build It Back launched a series of targeted campaigns to encourage 
homeowners with property damaged by Sandy to apply for the 
program and remain engaged. Older adult, low-income, and special 
needs households were the key target groups. In collaboration with 
DFTA and its non-profit partners, Build it Back went door- to-door 
to re-engage older applicants who dropped out of the program. A 
Disaster Case Manager was assigned to help applicants complete 
the necessary paperwork and remove any obstacles to participation. 
Working with the Center for NYC Neighborhoods, Build It Back 
stationed counselors in its offices to help homeowners with a range 
of legal and housing financial challenges related to their housing 
recovery. The counselors helped applicants with financial planning, 
avoiding accruing debt burdens, cancelling loans received after 
the storm that were never used, reconciling recovery benefits, and 
addressing mortgage payment delinquency to prevent foreclosure. 
Nearly 4,500 applicants have received counseling, and more than 60 
percent of applicants counseled were over 55 years of age. Build It 
Back offers a range of services to help homeowners obtain temporary 
housing while their homes are being elevated or rebuilt. Many of Build 
It Back’s older applicants require specialized support offered by the 
program, which includes apartment leasing, direct rent payments, 
and assistance moving back in. In addition, Build It Back worked with 
the New York Disaster Interfaith Service Unmet Needs Roundtable 
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   5 0
to help fill gaps in federal disaster recovery funding for older adults 
on fixed incomes and other under-resourced households. Overall, 
the Unmet Needs Roundtable provided funding to more than 2,000 
residents affected by Sandy.
  
47) ENGAGE HOME IMPROVEMENT CONTRACTORS IN BEST PRACTICES
The NYC Department of Consumer Affairs (DCA) distributes a 
tip sheet that provides recommendations for home improvement 
contractors to consider the special needs and circumstances of older 
adults when making repairs, and how they can help older New Yorkers 
live more safely at home. It is available online in English and Spanish. 
DCA also distributes the tip sheet as part of the Home Improvement 
Contractor license application packet at the DCA Licensing Center 
and NYC Small Business Support Center.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   5 1
48) PROMOTE USER-FRIENDLY AND SAFE ENVIRONMENTS FOR ALL
       THROUGH UNIVERSAL DESIGN
The Mayor’s Office for People with Disabilities released the Inclusive 
Design Guidelines, New York City, Second Edition (IDG) in 2017, in 
collaboration with the International Code Council. The aim of the 
IDG is to create more user-friendly and safe buildings and landscapes 
that improve the quality of life for everyone – including children, 
older adults, and individuals with disabilities. The IDG offers 
technical guidance to help designers produce multisensory enhanced 
environments that accommodate the diverse range of physical and 
mental abilities of people of all ages. Recommendations in the IDG 
can be applied for all use and occupancy classifications, particularly 
residential and commercial buildings. The second edition of the 
IDG is an expansion and refinement of the first edition published in 
2010. Recommendations in the second edition of the IDG include 
an emphasis on automation, accessible pedestrian systems, scooter 
usage, and active design.
   
49) EXPAND TRANSPORTATION OPTIONS FOR SENIORS
Working with DOT, DFTA and MOPD have received a grant of 
$1.8 million over three years from the Federal Transportation 
Administration to test an innovative program for older people 
and adults with disabilities. This pilot program will provide easily 
accessible door-to-door transportation to meet participants’ wide 
range of transportation needs while helping them to avoid social 
isolation. Eligible riders in three target areas of the Bronx, Brooklyn, 
and Queens will be able to use a transportation app to access a car 
PUBLIC SPACES  & TRANSPORTATION
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   5 2
service 24/7 to travel anywhere in the City. Each rider is eligible for 
up to $1,000 in rides spread over a year. Riders can also access the 
service through a dispatcher if they prefer. DFTA is testing whether 
a customer-sensitive travel option can be offered cost-effectively 
while expanding the riders’ access to the type of transportation that 
they need, when they need it. DFTA will conduct the three-year pilot 
between 2018 and 2021.
50) ENSURE NEW YORKERS WHO USE WHEELCHAIRS CAN EASILY ACCESS
      FOR-HIRE VEHICLE SERVICE
Increasing access to the NYC Taxi and Limousine Commission’s 
(TLC’s) fleet of more than 110,000 licensed vehicles is an important 
step to make New York City truly accessible to all of our residents and 
visitors, including those who use wheelchairs. In 2014, TLC created 
a proposal to introduce wheelchair accessible green and yellow taxis 
into the City’s fleet over time. To reach the for-hire vehicle (FHV) 
sector (liveries, car services, and luxury limousines)—which today 
transports at least 400,000 passengers each day—TLC has proposed 
a new accessible service requirement. Over the course of several 
years, FHV companies, which include popular ride-hailing apps, 
would be required to dispatch a gradually increasing share of trips to 
wheelchair accessible vehicles until they reach at least 25% of trips. 
This program would help ensure accessible vehicles are regularly on 
the road and available to pick up passengers who use wheelchairs in 
a reliable and timely manner. Following a public comment period 
and hearing, the TLC Board of Commissioners will vote on the new 
service requirement.
51) ENABLE NEW YORKERS WHO USE WHEELCHAIRS ANYWHERE IN THE
      FIVE BOROUGHS TO HAVE A TAXI DISPATCHED TO THEIR DOORSTEP
TLC launched Accessible Dispatch as a 24/7 accessibility program 
to connect New Yorkers who use wheelchairs and other mobility 
aids with accessible taxis. The program allows passengers to book 
a taxi for on-demand or reservation-based service by either calling 
the dispatcher directly, calling the City’s 311 system, or by using a 
web booker, text messaging, or a smartphone app. Passengers pay 
the metered fare for the trip with no extra costs. The Accessible 
Dispatch program accounts for more than 6,000 trips every month 
and continues to grow.
Currently the program dispatches taxis to passengers for trips that 
begin in Manhattan. Later this year, TLC will expand service by 
launching the Citywide Accessible Dispatch program, which would 
enable passengers who use wheelchairs and other mobility aids to 
In 2014, TLC created a 
proposal to introduce 
wheelchair accessible green 
and yellow taxis into the 
City’s fleet over time.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   5 3
request trips in yellow and green taxis originating anywhere in the 
five boroughs. With this expanded coverage area and additional 
accessible vehicles, New Yorkers and visitors who use mobility aids 
will be able to access the City like never before.
52) IMPROVE OLDER ADULT ACCESS TO PARKS
The NYC Department of Parks and Recreation (NYC Parks) is the 
steward of nearly 30,000 acres of land – 14 percent of New York 
City – including more than 5,000 individual properties ranging from 
beaches and parks to community gardens and Greenstreets. Parks 
Without Borders is a new vision to better connect parks and public 
spaces to their communities. This approach redesigns the areas 
where parks meet streets and sidewalks. Parks Without Borders will 
create more welcoming entrances, make park boundaries greener 
and more comfortable, and enhance sight lines to improve safety and 
accessibility for all, including older adults. Rethinking and redesigning 
these spaces will create new centers of community activity out of the 
underused areas next to parks. With input from thousands of New 
Yorkers, NYC Parks selected eight showcase projects in May 2016. 
These eight sites will share $40 million in capital funds to fulfill the 
Parks Without Borders vision. An additional $10 million will be used 
to incorporate these designs into ongoing projects. In the coming 
years, NYC Parks will incorporate the Parks Without Borders into the 
design process for all new and renovated sites.
Parks Without Borders will 
create more welcoming 
entrances, make park 
boundaries greener 
and more comfortable, 
and enhance sight lines 
to improve safety and 
accessibility for all, 
including older adults.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   5 4
53)  EXPAND MULTI-DISCIPLINARY TEAMS TO RESPOND TO COMPLEX 
       ELDER ABUSE CASES
Multi-Disciplinary Teams, or MDTs, include groups of professionals 
from diverse disciplines who together provide comprehensive 
assessments and consultation on elder abuse cases. Currently, Weill 
Cornell Medical Center, which has been a leader in the development of 
the MDT model, operates teams in Manhattan and Brooklyn. The teams 
have shown great success in addressing particularly complex elder 
abuse cases that involve coordination among multiple organizations, 
including District Attorneys, the NYC Police Department (NYPD), 
DFTA, OCDV, HRA’s Adult Protective Services (APS), medical 
centers, financial institutions, and a myriad of community-based 
organizations that include legal providers and elder abuse programs. 
The teams meet regularly and develop solutions to individual cases 
using a coordinated, community-based approach to handling elder 
abuse. Beginning in FY ’17, $1.5 million was baselined in the DFTA 
budget to expand MDTs from the current two boroughs to all five 
boroughs by FY ‘19. This expansion will vastly strengthen the City’s 
ability to address complex cases in a coordinated fashion, which is 
essential to resolving the interrelated social, financial, criminal, and 
legal challenges found in these most complicated of elder abuse cases.
54)  IMPLEMENT VISION ZERO INITIATIVES THAT FOCUS ON
       OLDER NEW YORKERS
The Vision Zero action plan is the City’s blueprint for preventing traffic 
related injuries and deaths on our streets. While older adults aged 60 
and older comprise 18 percent of the City’s population,25  they account 
for almost half of pedestrian fatalities.26  The disproportionate burden 
of pedestrian fatalities among older adults contributed to an increase 
in education and enforcement efforts focused on older adult safety. 
Vision Zero initiatives include partnering with senior centers to obtain 
specific feedback from older adults about street safety improvements, 
and launching a senior outreach and enforcement campaign.
55) INCREASE EDUCATION AND OUTREACH TO COMBAT ELDER ABUSE
Elder abuse is an issue that presents particular challenges, given 
that it involves the violation of a trusted relationship. Like domestic 
violence, elder abuse is difficult to combat because it often remains 
hidden. To address these challenges, the NYPD has designated 
precinct-based Domestic Violence Units to be the community liaisons 
in response to elder abuse. The Domestic Violence Unit within each 
The Vision Zero action plan 
is the City’s blueprint for 
preventing traffic related 
injuries and deaths on 
our streets. While older 
adults aged 60 and older 
comprise 18 percent of 
the City’s population, they 
account for almost half of 
pedestrian fatalities.
PUBLIC SAFETY
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   5 5
precinct serves as the precinct-based point of contact for APS, DFTA, 
elder abuse services providers, and the public. 
The NYPD has informed police officers about the roles and resources 
of APS and DFTA as partners of law enforcement. Additionally, the 
NYPD is working with elder abuse prevention advocates to create 
a roll call training video to assist police officers in identifying the 
common signs of elder abuse.
56) ENHANCE PROCESS OF LOCATING SENIORS WHO ARE
       REPORTED MISSING
Silver Alert, borne out of an age-friendly collaboration between 
DFTA, the NYPD, NYC Emergency Management (NYCEM), and the 
NYC Council, is a public notification system for missing older adults 
with certain cognitive impairments. When a person aged 65 and older 
with a cognitive impairment such as Alzheimer’s disease is reported 
missing and deemed to be in imminent danger of physical injury or 
death, the NYPD initiates a protocol through which a wide audience, 
including media outlets, senior services providers, medical facilities, 
and community organizations, is notified so the public may assist 
police in searching for the missing older adult. Notifications are also 
sent to subscribers of the City’s Notify NYC emergency notification 
system. Additionally, the NYPD is exploring the use of GPS and other 
technology to enhance the process of locating older adults who are 
reported missing.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   5 6
57) FOCUS ON OLDER ADULTS DURING EMERGENCY PLANNING
NYCEM plans and prepares for emergencies, educates the public 
about preparedness, coordinates emergency response and recovery, 
and collects and disseminates emergency information. Every year, 
NYCEM organizes a symposium that focuses on emergency planning 
for people with access and functional needs, including older adults 
and people with disabilities. The symposium brings together service 
providers, consumers, advocates, and community stakeholders to 
specifically address planning for people who require a higher level 
of support during emergencies. In addition, NYCEM hosts quarterly 
Access and Functional Needs Working Group meetings, which cover 
updates specific to this population, fostering a mindful and inclusive 
approach to emergency planning for all.
 
58) PROMOTE FIRE SAFETY EDUCATION AMONG OLDER ADULTS
The NYC Fire Department is the largest fire department in the United 
States, responding to more than a million emergencies every year. Since 
its inception, the FDNY has helped lead efforts to make NYC the safest 
big city in the nation. The FDNY also works to continually educate the 
public in fire safety, life safety, and disaster preparedness. In 2016, the 
FDNY recorded 48 fire deaths – the lowest number in NYC history. Of 
those deaths, 21 – or more than 40 percent – were older New Yorkers 
aged 65 or older. Older adults are disproportionately likely to suffer 
as a result of a household fire in comparison to the overall population. 
The FDNY is committed to disseminating life-saving knowledge to 
communities, and particularly older adults, about fire prevention and 
emergency preparedness through the Fire Safety Education program. 
In 2016, the FDNY provided more than 260 older adult-focused Fire 
Safety Education events, seminars, and workshops, reaching more 
than 40,000 individuals aged 65 and older. The Fire Safety Education 
presentations cover various topics, including smoke alarm installation 
and maintenance, emergency preparedness, and cooking safety. More 
information about the FDNY’s fire and life safety education program is 
available at  http://www.fdnysmart.org.
59) PROTECT OLDER ADULTS FROM EXTREME HEAT
Heat adaptation is a key priority for the de Blasio Administration, and 
the Mayor’s Office of Recovery and Resiliency (ORR) continues to 
develop strategies to mitigate the effects of rising temperatures in our 
communities. More Americans die from heat waves every year than from 
all other natural disasters combined.27  Each summer, NYC experiences 
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   5 7
an average of 450 heat-related emergency department visits, 150 heat-
related hospital admissions, 13 heat-stroke deaths, and about 115 
excess deaths from natural causes exacerbated by heat.28  Variation 
in our densely built environment results in disparate local-level heat 
risks, which are disproportionately borne by our most vulnerable New 
Yorkers, including older adults, those with poor health, and those who 
do not have access to air conditioning. DOHMH developed a Heat 
Vulnerability Index and the resulting map has given the Mayor a charge 
to mitigate heat citywide, with a thoughtful targeting of those most at-risk.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   5 8
In 2017, NYCEM launched the Community Emergency Planning Toolkit. 
The toolkit has been introduced to local community organizations, 
including aging services providers, throughout the five boroughs and 
outreach about the toolkit is ongoing. The toolkit addresses various 
hazards, including extreme heat, and provides guidance on ways 
communities can mitigate the negative effects of these hazards at the 
local level. In addition, NYCEM is working with DOHMH as well as 
DFTA to launch an extreme heat awareness campaign. The campaign, 
through local outreach and print ads, will feature older adults and will 
highlight heat safety tips, and is targeted to launch in summer 2017.
60) LAUNCH CLIMATE RISK TRAINING FOR HOME HEALTH AIDES 
Hot and humid summer weather can cause heat illness and even death. 
In New York City, DOHMH examined death records from 2008-2011 
and found that about 85 percent of NYC heat-stroke deaths happened 
after exposure to heat inside the home. Many victims were exposed to 
heat inside homes that lacked access to or did not use air conditioning. 
Older adults, those with chronic medical conditions or mental health 
conditions, and certain other groups are most vulnerable. Those who 
are socially isolated or homebound are also at risk. Cooling centers are 
open across the City during serious heat waves. However, published 
studies and City data suggest that many New Yorkers, including 
those most vulnerable to heat illness, prefer to stay at home during 
hot weather even if they cannot stay cool there, instead of visiting 
a cool place like a library, a friend’s home with air conditioning, or 
a City cooling center. Due to current and future risks in light of our 
changing climate, the City needs strategies to reach heat-vulnerable 
populations inside their homes. Studies show that indoor home 
temperatures can be 20°F higher than outdoor temperatures in the 
absence of air conditioning, and that indoor exposures to heat exceed 
the comfort range among older adult occupants.
Home Health Aides (HHAs) play a critical role in protecting our City’s 
most vulnerable residents by providing critical health services inside 
their homes and are important partners in the City’s efforts to protect 
at-risk New Yorkers. Due to established relationships between aides 
and clients, HHAs can be trusted messengers in communicating health 
risks and promoting protective measures inside the home. Starting in 
2017, the City is partnering with home care agencies to promote heat-
health messages to New Yorkers and engage HHAs as key players in 
building climate resiliency. To this end, the City developed a heat-
health module for continuing education trainers that will be offered 
as part of the standard curriculum by three key home care employers. 
Home Health Aides (HHAs) 
play a critical role in 
protecting our City’s most 
vulnerable residents by 
providing critical health 
services inside their homes 
and are important partners 
in the City’s efforts to 
protect at-risk New 
Yorkers.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   5 9
Through these employers, the City’s continuing education curriculum 
aims to reach nearly 8,000 HHAs, who will be trained to identify 
clients that are at highest risk, understand that medicines can affect 
the body’s ability to respond to heat, and understand ways to prevent 
heat-related illness and death. Most importantly, HHAs will learn to 
identify barriers that prevent their clients from staying cool and can 
connect the most vulnerable New Yorkers to the array of City services.
61)  ENCOURAGE NEW YORKERS TO CHECK ON  OLDER ADULTS  AND 
       OTHER AT-RISK NEIGHBORS THROUGH BE A BUDDY NYC
Be a Buddy NYC is a community-led preparedness model that promotes 
social cohesion. The City is investing $930,000 to launch this health-
based initiative, which is a two-year pilot that will promote community 
resiliency during extreme heat and other weather emergencies in key 
heat-vulnerable communities. South Bronx neighborhoods have among 
the highest rates of heat illness and death in New York City.29  Central 
Brooklyn and Central and East Harlem are also highly vulnerable 
to heat impacts.30  Be a Buddy NYC is an interagency partnership 
between DOHMH, ORR, and NYCEM to address heat-related health 
impacts by enhancing the response capacity, climate preparedness, 
and communication tools of local community-based organizations, 
while increasing neighborhood volunteerism through the creation of 
buddy systems. The City will work with each neighborhood to foster 
buddy systems between social service and community organizations, 
volunteers, and vulnerable New Yorkers, to be deployed during 
emergencies to conduct telephone and, if necessary, door-to-door and 
building level checks on vulnerable individuals.
Over the next two years, Be a Buddy NYC will implement protective 
measures against heat-related illnesses by:
	
1) Training community organizations and volunteers on emergency 
	
     protective measures and ways to assist vulnerable adults; and 
	
2) Engaging communities to identify alternative neighborhood 
	
      resources for  staying  cool and to communicate protective health 
	
      messages to hard-to-reach populations via trusted messengers.
62) PROMOTE FINANCIAL HEALTH AND WELL-BEING 
The Age-friendly NYC Commission’s Financial Health and Wellbeing 
Working Group, coordinated by the New York Academy of Medicine, 
is organizing a symposium in early 2018 in partnership with the Global 
Coalition on Aging and AARP. The symposium will focus on the role 
of business, government, and the community in ensuring financial 
security and promoting financial literacy and wellness in later life. 
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   6 0
63) ESTABLISH A RETIREMENT SAVINGS PROGRAM FOR
      PRIVATE SECTOR EMPLOYEES
Mayor de Blasio, in partnership with NYC Council Speaker Melissa 
Mark-Viverito and Public Advocate Letitia James, announced that New 
York City is working to become the first city in the country to create a 
retirement savings program for private sector employees. Fewer than 
half of all working New Yorkers have access to a retirement savings 
plan, and individuals who are low-income earners, immigrants, people 
of color, and women are disproportionately affected by this gap.31  Even 
those who have started to save do not have much: 40 percent of New 
Yorkers between the ages of 50 and 64 have less than $10,000 saved for 
retirement.32  To simply live at poverty level for a 15-year retirement, a 
New Yorker would need approximately $215,000 in savings.33  
Mayor de Blasio, Speaker Mark-Viverito, and Public Advocate James 
have partnered on legislation that would enable any New Yorker 
working at a business with 10 or more employees to enroll in an 
employee-funded retirement plan. Contributions would be exclusively 
from employees and made through payroll based on a default rate. 
Employees would have the ability to change their rate or opt out of the 
program. Also, employees would be able to transfer the savings account 
from job to job. Council Member Ben Kallos and Public Advocate James 
introduced legislation to implement the retirement savings program for 
public sector employees, as well as establish a retirement savings board 
to oversee this program.
64) EDUCATE OLDER NEW YORKERS ABOUT FRAUD
The NYC Department of Consumer Affairs protects and enhances 
the daily economic lives of New Yorkers. Given the unique consumer 
challenges older adults face, DCA has worked to educate older New 
Yorkers about common frauds and financial issues and where they 
can turn for help. In partnership with DFTA, DCA distributes a “Be a 
Savvy Senior” guide. This guide offers tips to help protect older adults 
from identity theft, frauds, scams, and deceptive advertising practices. 
Topics include reverse mortgages, home improvement scams, and 
sales schemes. It is available online in English at https://www1.nyc.
gov/assets/dca/downloads/pdf/consumers/Senior-Savvy-Tips.pdf. 
In addition, DCA distributed the guide to more than 800 attendees at 
events geared to older adults in 2016.
Local Law 100 of 2016, introduced by NYC Council Member Chaim 
Deutsch, required DCA to provide older adults with outreach and 
education regarding consumer protection issues. As provided in 
the legislation, DCA collaborated with DFTA to create “Consumer 
Given the unique consumer 
challenges older adults 
face, DCA has worked to 
educate older New Yorkers 
about common frauds and 
financial issues and where 
they can turn for help.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   6 1
Protection Tips for Older Adults,” which is available online in 
English, Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, 
and Spanish at https://www1.nyc.gov/site/dca/consumers/older-
adults.page. DCA also distributed this educational material to more 
than 700 older adults at outreach events in 2017.
65) TARGET EQUITABLE AND LOCALIZED DEPLOYMENT OF RESOURCES
      FOR OLDER ADULTS
The Age-friendly NYC Commission’s Public Safety Working Group 
is overseeing a new collaboration between the New York Academy 
of Medicine and the City University of New York Center for Urban 
Research to create IMAGE-NYC, an open-source interactive map of 
the current and projected aging population in NYC. Funded by the Fan 
Fox and Leslie R. Samuels Foundation, this map will facilitate more 
informed planning and more equitable and localized deployment of 
resources for older people by government agencies, elected officials, 
health care and supportive service providers, researchers, and funders 
in New York City. In addition, by providing location-specific, relevant 
information, this map will help to catalyze connections within and 
between sectors, institutions, and individuals leading to increased 
social cohesion, which supports aging in place and community 
resilience.
66) CONDUCT OUTREACH TO OLDER ADULTS ABOUT TRAFFIC SAFETY
While the Vision Zero action plan seeks to prevent traffic-related 
injuries and deaths across all age groups, the fact that people aged 60 
or older account for almost half of pedestrian fatalities contributed 
to increased education and enforcement efforts in senior centers, 
NORCs, and other places that serve older New Yorkers. According 
to data, older adults are not more likely to be struck while walking 
than other pedestrians. However, if an older pedestrian is struck by a 
vehicle, the individual is more likely to be severely injured or killed.34 
Also, older New Yorkers walk much more than older adults living 
elsewhere in the nation, and their pedestrian fatality rate is four times 
that of younger New Yorkers.35  In light of this data, older adults are 
key in highlighting areas where real engineering changes are needed. 
The DOT Safety Education team works with approximately 100 
locations each year to do outreach to older New Yorkers and gather 
information about street safety improvements. DOT also issues a 
safety magazine geared toward older adults.
Under Vision Zero, priority locations are identified based on data 
regarding the number of pedestrians killed or seriously injured at those 
locations. In areas with high crash histories and high concentrations 
While the Vision Zero 
action plan seeks to 
prevent traffic-related 
injuries and deaths 
across all age groups, the 
fact that people aged 
60 or older account for 
almost half of pedestrian 
fatalities contributed to 
increased education and 
enforcement efforts in 
senior centers, NORCs, and 
other places that serve 
older New Yorkers.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   6 2
of pedestrians and drivers, a two-pronged effort is implemented. 
Members of DOT’s Street Team target people using all modes of 
transportation in specific geographic locations, distributing flyers 
and engaging the public about the initiative. The NYPD is involved in 
providing foot patrol during the education effort. This is followed by a 
period of enforcement by the NYPD, which targets the most common 
driving and cycling violations. NYPD and DOT Street Teams visited 
more than 350 priority locations since the launch of Vision Zero and 
distributed 1.7 million educational flyers. In the third year of the 
Vision Zero Street Teams effort in 2016, DOT and NYPD focused on 
areas with high concentrations of older New Yorkers and along truck 
routes. DOT Safety Education also visited nearly 200 senior centers at 
priority locations as part of Vision Zero outreach. Additionally, DOT 
and DFTA collaborated and developed “Streetwise,” an educational 
program featuring older adults in their communities, which includes 
a discussion of how to prevent dangerous driving within their 
neighborhoods.
67)  FOCUS ENFORCEMENT AGAINST DANGEROUS DRIVING BEHAVIOR IN
       AREAS WITH HIGH POPULATIONS OF OLDER ADULTS
NYPD officers target enforcement against motorists observed 
committing Vision Zero hazardous offenses, and in particular, failure 
to yield. This enforcement is concentrated within areas with high 
populations of older residents, based on data provided by DFTA. These 
efforts are preceded by outreach to participants at local senior centers 
to identify locations where high rates of violations are observed. The 
NYPD’s focus on consistent and predictable enforcement deters 
reckless driving, prevents crashes, and saves lives. In 2016, 60 
percent of all traffic violations that NYPD issued were for Vision Zero 
hazardous violations.36  More than 42,000 summonses were issued 
to motorists who failed to yield to pedestrians in the crosswalk, a 
marked increase from the time prior to Vision Zero. NYPD officers 
issued approximately 137,000 speeding summonses in 2016. They 
also issued 1,900 summonses and made nearly 40 arrests of drivers 
who struck a pedestrian or cyclist in violation of the Right of Way law.
68) REDESIGN SAFER STREETS FOR OLDER NEW YORKERS
The comprehensive Vision Zero strategy is intended to address the 
safety of older adults. For instance, the Left Turn Study DOT issued in 
2016 found that half of those who are killed by a left-turning vehicle 
are aged 67 or older. DOT launched the Left Turn Traffic Calming 
pilot at more than 100 locations across the City in 2016. The Left Turn 
Traffic Calming treatments have proven effective at slowing vehicle 
turns, which improves safety for all pedestrians, especially older 
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   6 3
pedestrians who are more likely to be severely injured or killed if 
struck by a vehicle. In addition, DOT began testing raised crosswalks 
at two intersections in the Bronx and Brooklyn. Raised crosswalks 
increase the profile and visibility of all pedestrians at intersections, 
providing a particular benefit to older New Yorkers, children, and 
people who use wheelchairs. Also, raised crosswalks force motorists 
to slow down before entering intersections, providing a safety benefit 
to everyone. DOT is monitoring the effectiveness of this treatment to 
determine whether it would be effective at other City locations.
Completing more than 240 safety engineering projects since January 
2014, DOT has achieved unprecedented progress under Vision 
Zero. These redesigns make streets safer by simplifying complex 
intersections, narrowing lanes, making pedestrians and cyclists more 
visible, and shortening pedestrian crossing distances. In 2016, DOT 
implemented more than 100 of these safety engineering projects – 
more than ever before. DOT also installed approximately 770 leading 
pedestrian intervals in 2016, resulting in a total of nearly 1,250 
intersections made safer under Vision Zero, allowing pedestrians 
extra dedicated time to cross the street before traffic is released.   
69) ANALYZE PATTERNS OF TRAFFIC-RELATED RISK AND INJURY AMONG
      OLDER NEW YORKERS
DOHMH produces and publishes Epi Data Briefs, short publications 
that highlight data findings from varying agency programs and topics. 
In March 2017, DOHMH issued three NYC traffic safety-related 
Epi Data Briefs. The topics were motor vehicle occupant fatalities, 
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   6 4
pedestrian fatalities, and driving and self-reported dangerous driving 
behaviors. According to the Epi Data Brief on pedestrian fatalities in 
NYC between 2012 and 2014, older adults aged 65 and older had the 
highest pedestrian fatality rate (5.7 per 100,000 population) compared 
with children and adults aged 18 to 64.37  Among older adults, the 
fatality rate was higher among males than among females.38  Asian/
Pacific Islander older adults had the highest fatality rate among all 
race and ethnicity groups.39  By borough, the fatality rate was highest 
among older adults living in Brooklyn.40  More than half (57 percent) 
of older adult pedestrian fatalities resulted from a crash that occurred 
within 10 blocks of home.41  DOHMH will continue to analyze patterns 
of traffic-related risk and injury among older New Yorkers.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   6 5
70) PROTECT EMPLOYEES WITH CAREGIVING  RESPONSIBILITIES FROM 
      WORKPLACE DISCRIMINATION
Local Law 1 of 2016, introduced by Manhattan Borough President 
Gale Brewer and NYC Council Member Debi Rose, prohibits in New 
York City employment discrimination based on an individual’s actual 
or perceived status as a caregiver. The law provides protections 
against discrimination in the workplace for:
	
1) People providing direct and ongoing care to children under 
	
     the age of 18;
	
2) People caring for parents, siblings, spouses, grandparents,
	
    or grandchildren, among other relatives, with a disability 
	
    who rely on them for medical care or to meet their needs of 
	
    daily living; or
	
3) People caring for people with disabilities who live with 
	
    them and rely on them for medical care or to meet their 
	
    needs of daily living.
The law applies to employers with four or more employees and 
protects job applicants with caregiving responsibilities as well as 
current employees. For New Yorkers caring for the 1.8 million 
children under the age of 18, 1 million people aged 65 and older, and 
approximately 900,000 people with disabilities,42  the law makes 
it easier to file workplace discrimination claims under the NYC 
Human Rights Law. Previously, employees who were discriminated 
against for having caregiving responsibilities had to file a claim of 
gender discrimination, based on unlawful stereotypes regarding the 
caregiving responsibilities of members of a particular gender. Now, 
those employees are directly protected under one of the strongest 
human rights laws in the country. Charged with enforcing the NYC 
Human Rights Law and educating the public about protections 
under the law, the NYC Commission on Human Rights (CCHR) 
created educational materials for both employers (http://www1.nyc.
gov/assets/cchr/downloads/pdf/materials/Caregiver_FactSheet-
Employer.pdf) and employees (http://www1.nyc.gov/assets/cchr/
downloads/pdf/materials/Caregiver_FactSheet-Employee.pdf) 
to 
raise awareness about the new caregiver protections.
71) ENSURE ACCESS TO AGING SERVICES FOR ALL OLDER NEW YORKERS
The Mayor’s Office of Immigrant Affairs (MOIA) and DFTA issued a 
joint open letter, available at http://www.nyc.gov/html/dfta/html/
COMMUNICATION & INFORMATION
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   6 6
about/open_letter.shtml, reiterating the de Blasio Administration’s 
commitment to ensuring all New Yorkers, regardless of immigration 
status, continue to have access to DFTA and City services. The 
Administration has strong policies to protect the participants’ privacy 
in programs sponsored by the City and DFTA. Aging services providers 
may not ask about immigration status except to assess eligibility for 
benefits, and responses are completely voluntary. Also, providers can 
still assist with obtaining services for which immigration status is not 
applicable.
72) OUTREACH TO OLDER ADULTS FOR IDNYC ENROLLMENT
IDNYC is the largest municipal identification program in the country, 
and it serves a critical need given that approximately half of NYC 
residents aged 16 and older do not have a NYS Driver License.43  MOIA 
is committed to making IDNYC as effective and inclusive as possible, 
so that every New Yorker has access to the opportunities and security 
that come with having government-issued photo identification. 
IDNYC benefits every NYC community, including the most vulnerable 
communities, such as older adults. The IDNYC card is widely accepted 
across the City and provides eligibility for City services, entry to City 
buildings and schools, recognition by City agencies, such as the 
NYPD, and opportunity to open bank accounts at certain financial 
institutions. To supplement the value of the IDNYC card as a form of 
identification, the City has developed a set of key partnerships with 
libraries, cultural institutions, and other organizations.
MOIA’s team of multilingual organizers has been actively engaging 
older immigrant New Yorkers to facilitate access to IDNYC 
enrollments and to spread information regarding City services and 
programs. To this end, MOIA’s staff members have conducted mobile 
IDNYC enrollments for older adults at more than nine different 
IDNYC is the largest 
municipal identification 
program in the country, 
and it serves a critical need 
given that approximately 
half of NYC residents aged 
16 and older do not have a 
NYS Driver License.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   6 7
locations. Organizers have conducted presentations at schools, 
parent association meetings, community boards, and other venues 
serving immigrants and older adults, delivering information about 
IDNYC and City services. MOIA is actively seeking to expand access 
to IDNYC by bringing temporary enrollment sites to more locations, 
such as the Sherpa Temple in Jackson Heights serving Himalayan 
older adults, and a number of other sites that older New Yorkers 
attend. Organizers have also engaged NORCs and are planning 
upcoming additional bulk enrollments, presentations, and forums.
73) INCREASE OLDER ADULT ACCESS TO TECHNOLOGY
An internet connection is  vital tool to pursue a career after retirement, 
trim a household budget, access City services, and engage in your 
community. When connected to the internet, older adults can maintain 
close personal connections with loved ones no matter where they live. 
The inability to go online can compound health problems or social 
isolation given that medical information and personal communication 
are increasingly digital. 
The City has set a goal that every NYC resident and business will 
have affordable, reliable, high-speed broadband service by 2025. 
Currently, 30 percent of New Yorkers over the age of 60 do not have 
internet service at home, compared to a citywide rate of 20 percent. 
And close to half of New Yorkers over 60 years old who live in poverty 
have no home internet connection. The cost of service and a lack of 
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   6 8
digital skills can present major challenges for older New Yorkers. In 
2016, the City successfully advocated for modernization of the Federal 
Lifeline subsidy program to apply to internet service, making internet 
access more affordable for many older adults. The City is defending this 
program from the new policy reversals and budget cutbacks coming out 
of Washington, while working on other ways to make internet service 
affordable for all New Yorkers.
Through DFTA and its contracted community service partners, the City 
supports 120 computer labs in senior centers across the five boroughs. 
These labs provide computer workstations, broadband connectivity, 
digital literacy training, and a supportive environment tailored to the 
needs and interests of older adults. Together, these computer centers 
serve approximately 17,000 older New Yorkers annually. The City has 
also established a first-of-its-kind technology education center for older 
adults, via DFTA and its non-profit partner organization, Older Adults 
Technology Services (OATS). The Senior Planet Exploration Center 
offers older New Yorkers free classes on a broad range of technology 
subjects, as well as workshops, talks, and social events — all aimed at 
supporting older adults in expanding their access to the digital world. 
Also, through the NYC Connected Communities program, which 
expands the availability and capacity of public computer centers in the 
highest poverty areas in the City, OATS is implementing a technology 
initiative at the NYCHA Queensbridge development, funded by DFTA. 
As part of this program, seniors take courses in computer literacy, 
finance management, social media, and health and fitness.
74) REDESIGN THE DFTA WEBSITE TO IMPROVE ACCESS
The DFTA website, together with those of other City agencies, 
are being redesigned in collaboration with the NYC Department 
of Information Technology and Telecommunications (DOITT) to 
improve access for screen reading software for the visually impaired, 
as well as for general accessibility. Enhancements include improving 
the mobile viewing experience and providing on-screen translations 
in multiple languages. The redesign also focuses on content, assisting 
City agencies in publicizing valuable information in an accessible 
manner. Older adults are increasingly obtaining information online, 
and the City is working to remove technological barriers that prevent 
access.
75) LEVERAGE TECHNOLOGY TO ADDRES CHALLENGES
      OLDER ADULTS FACE
NYC BigApps is an annual competition sponsored by the NYC Economic 
Development Corporation that leverages the City’s tech, creative, 
and civic communities to develop technologies that address civic 
The DFTA website, together 
with those of other 
City agencies, are being 
redesigned in collaboration 
with the NYC Department 
of Information Technology 
and Telecommunications 
(DOITT) to improve access 
for screen reading software 
for the visually impaired, 
as well as for general 
accessibility.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   6 9
and urban challenges. This year, NYCEDC partnered with Civic Hall 
Labs to produce the BigApps 2017 competition with a special focus on 
addressing pressing challenges faced by NYC youth (ages 13-18), older 
adults (aged 65+), and immigrants, including transportation, access 
to information, and community resiliency. DFTA was a co-sponsor of 
the BigApps 2017 competition and helped mentor competitors. The 
winners received cash awards, marketing and promotion, acceptance 
into Civic Hall Labs’ civic accelerator program, and their solutions are 
eligible for a pilot on the LinkNYC communication network citywide, 
which provides free public Wi-Fi and phone service, among other 
amenities.
76) EDUCATE OLDER ADULTS ABOUT SUMMONSES AND REMOTE
      HEARING PROCESSES
The Office of Administrative Trials and Hearings (OATH) is an 
independent administrative law court that conducts nearly 300,000 
hearings on a diverse range of issues each year. Under the de Blasio 
Administration, OATH has instituted changes to rules and procedures 
in an effort to make the administrative justice process more equal and 
fair for New Yorkers who receive summonses. By consolidating the 
previously separate divisions that oversaw Environmental Control 
Board hearings, Taxi and Vehicle for Hire hearings, and Health hearings 
into one Hearings Division, the City is making the hearing process 
easier to navigate. All summonses are now subject to the same hearing 
procedures, rules, and deadlines, regardless of which City enforcement 
agency issues the summons.
In 2017, OATH established 
the Court’s Education 
for Seniors program or 
CourtESy. The CourtESy 
program brings 
information about OATH 
and the hearing process 
directly to older adults. 
CourtESy forums focus on 
OATH’s remote hearing 
methods, which give 
recipients of summonses 
the ability to contest 
summonses without having 
to attend OATH hearings in 
person.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   7 0
In 2017, OATH established the Court’s Education for Seniors program 
or CourtESy. The CourtESy program brings information about OATH 
and the hearing process directly to older adults. CourtESy forums 
focus on OATH’s remote hearing methods, which give recipients of 
summonses the ability to contest summonses without having to attend 
OATH hearings in person. In addition, OATH’s Administrative Law 
Court’s Community Education Services (ACCES) program seeks to 
connect residents, including older adults, with information from OATH 
about how to respond to a summons issued by a NYC enforcement 
agency. To promote the CourtESy and ACCES programs in 2017, OATH 
has held events with NYC Council Aging Committee Chair Margaret 
Chin, Council Member Ben Kallos, and Manhattan Borough President 
Gale Brewer.
77) PARTNER WITH THE INTERNATIONAL  COMMUNITY ON AGING 
      SERVICES OUTREACH AND EDUCATION
The Mayor’s Office for International Affairs (International Affairs) works 
to foster positive relations and encourage collaboration between the 
international community and NYC agencies and local neighborhoods. 
International Affairs focuses on sharing the City’s policies and best 
practices globally, as well as responding to requests from foreign 
governments, the United Nations, and the U.S. Department of State. 
International Affairs advises City agencies on diplomatic and consular 
matters, and provides guidance to the diplomatic and consular 
community on City-related issues. International Affairs has worked with 
DFTA to coordinate visits from many foreign governments interested 
in learning about aging services in New York City. DFTA has met with 
government officials from New Zealand, Spain, Australia, Hong Kong, 
Brazil, and Mexico, among others.
Top Non-English Languages Spoken
Spanish
10000
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
140000
160000
180000
200000
220000
Chinese
Russian
Italian
French
Creole
French
Greek
Language
Number of People
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   7 1
78) RECRUIT ARTISTS TO CONDUCT PROGRAMS IN SENIOR CENTERS
SU-CASA is a community arts engagement program sponsored by 
the NYC Council, the NYC Department of Cultural Affairs (DCLA), 
and DFTA. The SU-CASA program builds upon study findings that 
correlate creative expression with healthy aging. A landmark study 
conducted in New York City and other cities by Dr. Gene Cohen, an 
American psychiatrist who pioneered research in geriatric mental 
health, showed that older adults who are actively engaged in creative 
activities suffered less from depression, required fewer doctor visits, and 
took less medication than control group participants. The work of Dr. 
Cohen supported the capability of seniors functioning at high levels of 
creativity and intellectual rigor, and that involvement in the arts late in 
life leads to a lower incidence of illness and injury.
Through the SU-CASA initiative, artists and non-profit arts organizations 
are placed in residence at senior centers across the five boroughs to 
provide arts programming for older adults. Artistic partners work in 
a wide variety of disciplines, including music, theater, dance, poetry, 
ceramics, photography, writing, and many more. Each SU-CASA 
program engages participating older adults in an art project or a series of 
cultural programs throughout the course of a six-month residency. Each 
residency culminates with a program at the senior center, which is open 
to the public, such as exhibits, readings, performances, open houses, 
and other cultural interactions. Continuing in the tradition of the highly 
successful Seniors Partnering with Artists Citywide program, SU-CASA 
greatly expanded arts opportunities for older adults. As a result of a 
more than $2 million allocation from the NYC Council in FY ’17, 153 
artists and arts organizations were placed in senior centers, which is the 
highest number of placements in the history of the program. In FY ’18, 
the Council increased funding for SU-CASA to more than $2.5 million.
COMMUNITY  & CIVIC PARTICIPATION
A landmark study showed 
that older adults who are 
actively engaged in creative 
activities suffered less from 
depression, required fewer 
doctor visits, and took less 
medication.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   7 2
79) FOCUS ON OLDER ADULTS IN THE CREATE NYC CULTURAL PLAN
Mayor de Blasio signed Local Law 46 of 2015, introduced by NYC Council 
Member Stephen Levin, requiring the City to produce a cultural plan 
to serve as a guide for the future of arts and culture in New York City. 
Starting in 2016, DCLA worked with artists, cultural organizations, NYC 
agencies, arts and culture experts, and community residents to collect 
data and public input to inform the plan, known as CreateNYC. The 
agency made a particular effort to solicit the feedback of organizations 
working in the field of creative aging as well as older adults who are 
artists, cultural workers, consumers of culture, and residents of New 
York City. 
In one of the public sessions hosted for CreateNYC, older artists were 
invited to share their recommendations and challenges related to 
affordability, remaining in their own neighborhoods, and retirement 
after a career as an artist or cultural worker. Public input also 
demonstrated a need for greater engagement with older immigrant 
New Yorkers to increase their inclusion in the City’s cultural life, and 
a need to better understand their value as repositories of cultural 
heritage in many communities. DCLA convened a CreateNYC focus 
group of professionals working in organizations that serve older adults 
where participants discussed professional training, funding for creative 
aging programs, and capacity-building for arts organizations and social 
service partners. 
As a result of this open process, several goals in the CreateNYC cultural 
plan directly address the needs of older New Yorkers. Recommendations 
include:
	
• Building on DCLA’s creative aging programs by working with 
	
  partner agencies and organizations;
	
• Supporting these programs citywide in both age-neutral and
	
   senior focused spaces; and
	
• Encouraging arts organizations to provide accessible 
	
    accommodations for older adults.
The cultural plan, which will be released in summer 2017, also notes 
existing support for programs providing services to older artists and 
cultural workers. By building on existing strengths while acknowledging 
gaps in services and strategies for improvement, CreateNYC lays out 
a path toward a cultural community that is more inclusive of older 
New Yorkers – both as artists and audiences – and acknowledges the 
incredible source of talent, innovation, and experience within older 
New Yorkers.
By building on existing 
strengths while 
acknowledging gaps in 
services and strategies for 
improvement, CreateNYC 
lays out a path toward a 
cultural community that 
is more inclusive of older 
New Yorkers.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   7 3
80) INSPIRE OPPORTUNITIES FOR SOCIAL AND CULTURAL PARTICIPATION
The Age-friendly NYC Commission’s Media, Arts, and Culture Working 
Group is developing a digital and printed toolkit to inspire new 
opportunities for arts and cultural participation, foster social engagement, 
build community, and reduce isolation. The toolkit provides evidence 
to support the value of older people in communities and the value of 
arts and culture as we age; socio-demographic data; no and low-cost 
strategies to attract and cater to a multigenerational audience;  examples 
of arts and cultural organizations welcoming older people; aging services 
organizations bringing in arts and culture; and organizations using public 
space to create community-based arts programs inclusive of people of all 
ages.
81) INCREASE RECRUITMENT OF OLDER ADULTS TO THE
       MUNICIPAL WORKFORCE
The de Blasio Administration strives to recruit multicultural and 
multi-generational populations that historically have not been well-
represented in our workforce. The NYC Department of Citywide 
Administrative Services (DCAS) has attended several events in recent 
years specifically targeting older adults, including the DFTA Senior 
Community Services Employment Program Job Fair and the Annual 
Military Retiree Appreciation Day Resources Fair. From FY ‘13 to FY 
‘15, the number of new hires aged 60 and older more than doubled, 
to more than 500. The City agencies that employ the highest number 
of employees aged 60 and older vary in their scope and mission, 
including NYC Health + Hospitals (18 percent), HRA (17.5 percent), and 
DOHMH (17 percent).
 
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   7 4
In addition, DCAS offers trainings that focus on intergenerational 
issues, 
age 
discrimination, 
reasonable 
accommodations 
for 
employment candidates and employees, and the impact of unconscious 
bias in the selection process. More than 60,000 municipal employees 
across many agencies have participated since 2014. DCAS employees 
represent a full spectrum of diverse backgrounds (i.e., cultural, 
ethnic, generational, religious, etc.) that mirror the community at 
large. The City is committed to creating an innovative and inclusive 
environment. Training objectives include developing inclusive 
behaviors and leadership skills that will create an environment where 
all employees feel valued, included, and engaged; utilizing unique 
skill sets to better serve the vast diversity in all NYC communities; and 
drawing upon personal experiences to gain insight about inclusion.
82) PROVIDE NEW VOLUNTEER OPPORTUNITIES  FOR OLDER NEW YORKERS
In partnership with NYC Service, the DFTA Volunteer Resource 
Center (VRC) promotes volunteerism by recruiting volunteers for 
programs that serve older adults. Since its launch in January 2015, 
more than 500 volunteers have come to the VRC to provide service to 
older New Yorkers. Hailing from diverse backgrounds and ranging in 
age from college students to older adults, they have helped older New 
Yorkers pay their bills, counsel older adults about Medicare options, 
lead health and wellness programming, and more. According to VRC 
surveys of the DFTA provider network, these contract agencies are 
using large numbers of volunteers to help them meet their goals 
and provide services to older New Yorkers. DFTA contract agencies 
provided an estimated 1.1 million hours of service to older adults 
in New York City, and more than half of that total was provided by 
older adult volunteers. Now in its third year, the VRC continues its 
work to recruit and refer volunteers, and leads a Senior Support 
Coalition of contract providers to collaborate on strategies to increase 
volunteerism for and by older New Yorkers.
83) CULTIVATE AGE-FRIENDLY NEIGHBORHOODS
First introduced by the Age-friendly NYC Commission as “Aging 
Improvement Districts,” the “Age-friendly Neighborhoods” model 
leverages the City’s organizational infrastructure, specifically the 
51 NYC Council Districts and 70 Business Improvement Districts, 
to advance neighborhood-level, age-friendly priorities through 
community and economic development efforts. In partnership 
with the Council, Age-friendly NYC has connected with more 
than 3,000 older New Yorkers across 19 neighborhoods citywide 
through community consultations, focus groups, interviews, and 
surveys. The data was collected in four languages (English, Spanish, 
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   7 5
Chinese, and Russian). In response to the consultation findings, 
Neighborhood Action Plans were created, leading to innovation at the 
neighborhood level. One example is the Age-friendly Ambassadors 
Program in Bedford-Stuyvesant, where older people focus on making 
improvements to local retail, connecting residents to benefits and 
entitlements, planning social events, and volunteering to help youth. 
Another is the Myrtle Avenue Business Improvement District, which 
works to incorporate the needs of older consumers into its business 
attraction and retention strategies. Age-friendly NYC is now working 
to scale this initiative to the borough level beginning with Brooklyn in 
partnership with Brooklyn Borough President Eric Adams.
                                                                                                     
84) OFFER ENVIRONMENTAL  STEWARDSHIP OPPORTUNITIES
      FOR OLDER NEW YORKERS
NYC Parks is responsible for 600,000 street trees and 2 million more 
in parks. The NYC Parks Stewardship Program offers opportunities 
for older New Yorkers to stay engaged in their communities and 
care for our local natural resources. Older New Yorkers can join 
public volunteer events or coordinate their own local event via the 
NYC Parks Request a Project page at https://www.nycgovparks.org/
opportunities/volunteer/stewardship/request-a-project. Events can 
include planting, invasive species removal, aerating and mulching 
street tree beds, and wetland clean-up projects. In addition, the Super 
Stewards Program offers the opportunity for older adults to gain 
hands-on training in the care of natural areas and street trees. These 
independent Stewards can work on their own, lead other volunteers, 
host projects, apply for mini-grants, network with other volunteers, 
and get a sneak peek at the inner workings of NYC Parks. Through 
the agency’s place-based Green Neighborhoods program, NYC Parks 
interacts with local senior centers as part of its community assessment 
process and is actively working to engage older adults as a vital part of 
the Green Neighborhoods effort.
The NYC Parks 
Stewardship Program 
offers opportunities for 
older New Yorkers to 
stay engaged in their 
communities and care for 
our local natural resources.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   7 6
85) SUPPORT AGING IN PLACE VILLAGES
Aging in Place villages represent an emerging consumer-driven, 
social support model that aims to enhance the social engagement, 
independence, and well-being of community-dwelling older adults 
through a combination of social activities, volunteer opportunities, 
service referral, and direct assistance. In December 2016, the Age-
friendly NYC Commission’s Public Safety Working Group, with 
support from AARP, convened for the first time representatives 
currently implementing or considering an aging in place initiative 
in New York City. The purpose was to share experiences, promising 
practices, and new thinking on how to expand and scale the model 
to help older New Yorkers age in their community. The challenges of 
these aging in place efforts include lack of space, lack of administrative 
capacity, and in some cases, sustainability, since they are primarily 
voluntary. All of the representatives expressed a need for more formal 
connection to resources. A LISTSERV was created to help them share 
information and to provide them with information and resources. 
For example, there has been targeted outreach using NYCEM’s new 
toolkit for Community Emergency Planning to address emergency 
preparedness. In addition, one group was connected with a pro 
bono attorney and received information about fiscal sponsorship. 
Collectively, these groups engage approximately 2,000 seniors, many 
of whom have mobilized around age-friendly businesses and outreach 
to promote the Senior Citizen Rent Increase Exemption. Age-friendly 
NYC is continuing to explore how to leverage these efforts to spread 
age-friendly activity and how to promote the creation of more self-
directed groups in other parts of the City.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   7 7
86) MAXIMIZE LIBRARIES FOR OLDER ADULT PROGRAMMING
Functioning as centers of learning and civic engagement, the City’s 
three library systems spanning all five boroughs offer free, quality 
services to older adults, students, families, job seekers, and anyone 
in need of information or assistance. In addition to their important 
traditional services of circulating millions of books and supporting 
research, libraries are expanding their roles and working in 
increasingly close partnership with the City to support the changing 
needs of NYC neighborhoods and residents.
All three library systems provide robust programming for older 
adults. The New York Public Library (NYPL) organizes a regular arts 
series, Art for a Lifetime, which offers workshops in painting, drawing, 
collage, and other art forms. These are available in many locations 
across the library network. NYPL provides free technology courses 
and programs for older adults in 80 locations through TechConnect. 
TechConnect classes assist older adults with sharpening Microsoft 
Office skills, mastering online shopping and banking, communicating 
online with family and friends around the world, and learning 
advanced skills, such as coding and Photoshop editing. In addition, 
NYPL offers workshops for older adults on fitness, pedestrian safety, 
and consumer fraud scams. 
The Brooklyn Public Library’s (BPL) Services for Older Adults offers 
inclusive programming and services tailored to patrons aged 50 
and older, including lectures, films, performances, and educational 
courses that reflect the broad interests of older adults. The Creative 
Aging program at BPL offers multi-session art workshops for older 
adults, led by a professional teaching artist. Through Library Lane 
at BPL, older adults learn how to bowl virtually and compete during 
monthly tournaments. Classes at every BPL branch connect older 
adults to technology. BPL also has an ongoing oral history project, 
Our Streets, Our Stories, which explores Brooklyn through the words 
of older adult residents. In addition, BPL offers teleconference and 
online courses for those who are homebound and hosts cultural 
events and presentations at programs for older adults. 
Queens Library has a wealth of free programs and resources for 
older adults, such as book discussion groups, live performances and 
readings, talks and panel discussions, film screenings, drama clubs, 
chess clubs, arts and crafts workshops, and health and wellness 
programs. A range of technology classes for older adult learners is 
offered at the Cyber Center at Queens Central Library and other select 
locations. The Adult Learner Program at Queens Library provides 
Functioning as centers 
of learning and civic 
engagement, the City’s 
three library systems 
spanning all five boroughs 
offer free, quality services 
to older adults, students, 
families, job seekers, 
and anyone in need of 
information or assistance.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   7 8
services and lifelong learning opportunities, including English 
language classes, through Adult Learning Centers in the network. 
HealthLink and ConnectCare offer educational programs and health 
screenings at Queens Library locations. Queens Library also offers 
lectures, classes, book discussions, music, theater, debates, and chats 
by teleconference, video, and Livestream. Additionally, each of the 
library systems provide books and other collection materials by mail 
to the homebound.
Age-friendly NYC
Commission
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   8 1
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   8 2
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   8 3
Acknowledgments
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   8 7
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Age-friendly NYC would not be possible without the efforts of 
numerous partners, organizations, and agencies. Special recognition 
must be given to the invaluable contributions of the Office of the Mayor, 
Office of the Deputy Mayor for Strategic Initiatives, NYC Council, 
New York Academy of Medicine, Department for the Aging, Office 
of Administrative Trials and Hearings, Office of the Chief Medical 
Examiner, Department of City Planning, City University of New 
York, Department of Citywide Administrative Services, Department 
of Consumer Affairs, Department of Cultural Affairs, Mayor’s Office 
to Combat Domestic Violence, NYC Emergency Management, 
Department of Environmental Protection, Department of Finance, 
Fire Department, Office of the Food Policy Director, Department of 
Health and Mental Hygiene, NYC Housing Authority, Department 
of Housing Preservation and Development, Housing Recovery 
Operations, Human Resources Administration, City Commission 
on Human Rights, Mayor’s Office of Immigrant Affairs, Department 
of Information Technology and Telecommunications/NYC311, 
Mayor’s Office for International Affairs, Mayor’s Office for People 
with Disabilities, Mayor’s Office of Environmental Remediation, NYC 
Economic Development Corporation, NYC Health + Hospitals, NYC 
Service, New York Public Library, Office of Recovery and Resiliency, 
Department of Parks and Recreation, Police Department, Department 
of Probation, Department of Small Business Services, Department of 
Social Services, Mayor’s Office of Sustainability, Taxi and Limousine 
Commission, Department of Transportation, Department of Veterans’ 
Services, and Department of Youth and Community Development.
Immeasurable gratitude to the Department of Social Services Office of 
Communications and Marketing Graphics Unit for their exceptional 
efforts in designing and producing this report.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   8 8
ENDNOTES
1 2000 Census. NYC Department of City Planning. “New York 
City Population Projections by Age/Sex & Borough, 2010-2040.” 
December 2013.
2 AARP, LiveOn NY and New York State Caregiving and Respite 
Coalition. Report: Caregivers in Crisis – Why New York Must Act. 
November 2013.
3 National Alliance for Caregiving and AARP Public Policy Institute. 
Caregiving in the US. June 2015.
4 Id.
5 AARP Public Policy Institute. Valuing the Invaluable: 2015 Update.
6 Pardasani M, Berkman C. Senior Center Evaluation – Final Report. 
June 28, 2016.
7 Id.
8 Id.
9 Id.
10 Id.
11 Id.
12 Id.
13 Weber T. Services and Advocacy for Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual & 
Transgender Elders. Testimony before the NYC Council, Committee 
on Aging and Subcommittee on Senior Centers. Fiscal Year 2018 
Preliminary Budget, Hearing, March 13, 2017.
14 Id.
15 Id.
16 Id.
17 Id.
18 Id.
19 AARP Foundation. Framework for Isolation in Adults Over 50. May 
2012.
20 n4a. Expand Your Circles: Prevent Isolation and Loneliness As You 
Age. 2016.
21 NYC Department of Health & Mental Hygiene. Bureau of Vital 
Statistics death records 2012-2014. Statewide Planning and Research 
Cooperative System (SPARCS) inpatient and emergency department 
visits 2012-2014. Data represent yearly average from 2012-2014.
22 NYC Department for the Aging. Profile of Older New Yorkers, p. 
21-22.
June 1, 2016.
23 AARP. Aging in Place: A State Survey of Livability Policies and 
Practices. December 2011.
24 US Census Bureau. 2014 American Community Survey.
A G E - F R I E N D L Y  N Y C :  N E W  C O M M I T M E N T S  F O R  A  C I T Y  F O R  A L L  A G E S
P A G E   8 9
25 Id. at 1.
26 Office of the Mayor of NYC. Vision Zero: Year Three Report. 
February 2017.
27 Berko J, Ingram DD, Saha S, Parker JD. Deaths attributed to heat, 
cold, and other weather events in the United States, 2006-2010. Natl 
Health Stat Report 2014 (76): 1-15.
28 Centers for Disease Control. Heat Illness and Deaths - New York 
City, 2000-2011. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly 2013; 62 (31): 617-
621. Northeast Regional Climate Center; Northeast Overview (July, 
August, and September 2016). 2016.
29 Office of the Mayor of NYC, Office of the First Deputy Mayor. 
Cool Neighborhoods NYC: A Comprehensive Approach to Keep 
Communities Safe in Extreme Heat. June 2017.
30 Id.
31 Office of the Mayor of NYC, Press Office. State of #OurCity: Mayor 
de Blasio Announces Plan for Retirement Security for All New Yorkers 
[Press release]. February 4, 2016.
32 Id.
33 Id.
34 Id.
35 Office of the Mayor of NYC. Vision Zero Manhattan Pedestrian 
Safety Action Plan. 2015.
36 Id. at 33.
37 Fung L, Conderino S. Pedestrian Fatalities in New York City. NYC 
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene: Epi Data Brief (86); 
March 2017.
38 Id.
39 Id.
40 Id.
41 Id.
42 NYC Commission on Human Rights. Mayor de Blasio and Human 
Rights Commissioner Malalis Announce New Caregiver Law Goes 
into Effect,
Providing Protection to Employees with Caregiving Responsibilities 
from Workplace Discrimination [Press release]. May 4, 2016.
43 Office of the Mayor of NYC, Office of the First Deputy Mayor. One 
New York: The Plan for a Strong and Just City. April 2015.
nyc.gov
2017
