Engaging the
Community
to Create
Community
Working together, local leaders and residents 
can build more vibrant cities, towns and neighborhoods
for people of all ages. Here’s how.
A publication of
AARP Network of Age-Friendly States and Communities
CONTINUING CYCLE OF PLANNING AND IMPROVEMENT
In this model, community leaders and residents work together to:
1.		 Conduct a comprehensive and inclusive baseline 
assessment of the age-friendliness of the community
2.		 Develop a three-year community-wide
action plan based on assessment findings
3.		 Implement the plan
4.		 Use identified indicators to monitor
progress against the plan
Then analyze, adapt, update and repeat!
Assessment
Implementation
Evaluation
Planning
Creating Community Is an Ongoing Process
Just because the work never ends doesn’t mean the work isn’t getting 
done — and succeeding. It is! As models used by Cities of Service and AARP 
demonstrate, change is about a continuing cycle of improvement.
START WITH
CITY LEADERSHIP
Mayors and other city 
leaders must be 
involved for effective 
and authentic citizen 
engagement.
 
SU
ST
AI
N E
NG
AG
EM
EN
T A
ND
 P
AR
TIC
IP
AT
IO
N
BU
ILD
 T
RU
ST
DELIBERATE WITH 
THE COMMUNITY
Better solutions are 
unearthed when 
citizens and city 
leaders come together.
IDENTIFY
A CHALLENGE
City leaders are 
uniquely positioned
to identify challenges 
that impact the city
at large.
SHOW
IMPACT
With real results,
city leaders can 
celebrate success 
and fuel further
citizen engagement. 
GET
 TO WORK
When city leaders and 
citizens collectively 
take action, stronger 
results are generated 
and trust is built.
Cities of Service
CITIZEN ENGAGEMENT MODEL
See the back cover to learn more about AARP and Cities of Service.
1
How We Engage
Cities of Service coalition cities partner with local residents, 
city agencies and community organizations to identify priority 
challenges that can be addressed with help from citizens. After 
deliberating with the community, city leaders and citizens 
come together to take action. Their combined efforts generate 
strong results and build trust between citizens and city leaders, 
which encourages and sustains future engagement. 
Through the AARP Livable Communities initiative and a 
network of 53 state offices, AARP engages, educates and 
inspires elected officials, local leaders, planners, citizen 
activists and skilled volunteers. (You’ll meet some of the latter 
starting on page 9.) AARP helps identify community needs and 
the types of programs, policies and projects that can meet 
those needs and improve the lives of older adults and people 
of all ages. The goal is for communities to be livable for 
everyone, regardless of age or life stage. 
INTRODUCTION
Engaged Citizens 
Build Stronger Communities
“Citizens are residents 
who participate in their 
community and who 
see themselves as an 
integral part of their 
city. As citizens, we can 
all take part in creating 
better places to live, 
work and play.”
— Cities of Service
“Communities need to 
both naturally and 
intentionally have ways 
for residents and 
visitors to be involved, 
to socialize, to learn and 
to share experiences.” 
— AARP
t Using Cities of Service’s citizen engagement model and experience helping 
mayors work with residents to solve problems, as well as AARP’s 
age-friendly-communities model and experience working with communities 
and volunteers, we offer examples of effective community engagement. u 
A NOTE TO READERS: The articles that appear with a blue headline have been selected from the many available on CitiesOfService.org.
Those with red titles are from the 2018 edition of the AARP publication Where We Live: 100+ Inspiring Examples from America’s Local Leaders,
which can be downloaded or ordered for free at AARP.org/WhereWeLive.
2
Karen Freeman-Wilson became the mayor of her 
hometown, Gary, Indiana, in 2011. She campaigned on a 
promise that her administration would be responsive to Gary’s 
residents and that when the city’s government saw a problem, it 
would fix the problem. When it heard from a citizen, it would 
address the concern. 
Freeman-Wilson’s commitment to community engagement 
helped get her elected to a second four-year term and has 
propelled her to leadership roles with the U.S. Conference of 
Mayors and the National League of Cities. 
“We understand that citizens are inherently skeptical about 
government,” Freeman-Wilson said at the 2018 Cities of 
Service Engaged Cities Award Summit. “So how do you remove 
that skepticism?” The answer, she explains, is to make citizens 
part of the city’s planning and problem-solving process. 
For instance, during the development of Gary’s 
comprehensive plan, residents were invited to contribute 
alongside city staff — and many accepted. The shared work 
made the results the “citizens of Gary’s comprehensive plan,” 
says Freeman-Wilson. “They’ll own it and they’ll own, we 
expect, the implementation.”
Freeman-Wilson is among the many mayors who now 
embrace having the community engaged in the business of 
governing. In fact, such mayors realize that community 
outreach and responsiveness isn’t an optional endeavor. 
“With citizens using social media to question government, to 
demand transparency, it has become a necessity on our part to 
say, ‘Yes, we want you involved. Yes, your opinion matters. Yes, 
we want to hear what you think and what you need from us.’ ”
One of the results, says Freeman-Wilson, is that Gary has 
citizens who, at their own expense and using their own 
equipment, are working to eliminate blight in their 
neighborhoods. (See the box at right.) 
The mayor’s efforts also led to Cities of Service selecting 
Gary as one of 10 participants in the City Hall AmeriCorps 
VISTA Love Your Block program, which helps city leaders 
engage with residents to revitalize their neighborhoods. 
People originally from Gary who currently live elsewhere 
have also offered to help. “We had a guy from Austin, Texas, 
say, ‘I’m a professor in marketing and customer service. I’d like 
to come home and teach a customer service class at my own 
expense,’ ” the mayor recalls. “So he came and taught two 
classes for the folks who work in city government.” 
Freeman-Wilson calls such Gary-bred community 
involvement “our homecomings.” 
Inviting Involvement and Leading by Example
Start with City Leadership 
Mayors and other community leaders must be involved for effective 
and authentic citizen engagement
CITY OF GARY
Gary, Indiana, Mayor Karen Freeman-Wilson chats with 
a fellow passenger on one of her city’s new rapid 
transit buses (arrivals every 20 minutes).
CUTTING RIGHT TO THE CHASE
“I started cutting grass as a way to get out 
in the community and to really send a message. 
I would see these lawns where you had two 
neighbors, one on either side of a vacant or 
abandoned house. The neighbors would keep 
their properties pristine, but they wouldn’t cut 
the grass of the house in the middle. I’d say, 
‘Gee, if you cut this grass in the middle, it would 
make your property look better.’ After seeing
the city’s mayor mow the lawn herself, the 
neighbors generally follow suit. As one man told 
me, ‘Mayor, if you cut it, then I’m going to 
maintain it that way.’ ” 
— Mayor Karen Freeman-Wilson
3
Embracing Kindness and Compassion
Greg Fischer, the mayor of Louisville, Kentucky, signed a 
resolution in 2011 committing to a multiyear Compassionate 
Louisville initiative. 
“Being a compassionate city is both the right thing and the 
necessary thing to do to ensure that we take care of all of our 
citizens,” Fischer said. “There’s a role for all of us in making 
sure no one is left behind or goes wanting.”
In Anaheim, California, Mayor Tom Tait launched the 
Hi Neighbor campaign in 2011 to encourage residents to 
knock on one another’s doors and introduce themselves. In 
2017, Anaheim officially adopted the motto “City of Kindness.”
Tait became intrigued by the potential of kindness to 
improve his community when he was a City Council member 
and a holistic doctor told him that with a city, as with the 
human body, one could either treat symptoms of illness or 
stimulate healing from within. The concept resonated with 
Tait so strongly that, when he ran for mayor in 2010, he 
promised to make kindness a cornerstone of his 
administration.
“The idea is that if you could actually change the culture, 
that affects everything,” Tait explains. “If everyone is a little 
OFFICE OF THE MAYOR, ANAHEIM, CALIFORNIA
Mayors Tom Tait (center) of Anaheim, California, and Greg Fischer (right) of Louisville, Kentucky, during a 2018 visit with 
the Dalai Lama in Dharamsala, India.
kinder, literally everything gets better.”
The Anaheim mayor sees kindness as an antidote for 
problems ranging from school bullying and drug addiction 
— which, he says, is “really a function of isolation and lack of 
kindness” — to the neglect of older adults.
“You can sit on your couch and be nice, respectful, 
considerate, empathetic and even compassionate. But to be 
kind, you have to get off of your couch and do something for 
someone else,” Tait wrote in an essay titled “Why Kindness?” 
He continued: “Kindness is an action word. It’s a word that 
can change a family, a neighborhood, a school, a city, a nation 
and, ultimately, our world.”
Compassion has become such an integral public policy in 
Louisville that its 2017 progress report addressed the topic, 
noting that there was a 9 percent decline in homelessness and 
the Compassionate Schools program was implemented to 
promote empathy and similar values in 25 elementary schools.
That same year, the city’s Give a Day week of service 
inspired 180,000 acts by volunteers. The annual We Walk for 
Compassion event attracted 2,500 students, who performed 
a combined 300,000 hours of service. 
4
According to the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration, 94 percent of vehicle crashes can be tied to 
a human choice or error. One way to address the problem is 
to capitalize on the popularity of contests and the use of 
self-help mobile phone apps. 
In Boston, Massachusetts, Mayor Martin J. Walsh’s 
Vision Zero Boston initiative aims to eliminate traffic 
fatalities by 2030. As part of that effort, the city partnered 
with Cambridge Mobile Telematics and the Arbella Insurance 
Foundation to create the Boston’s Safest Driver contest. 
Drivers downloaded a smartphone app to log their daily 
travels and track five metrics: speed, acceleration, braking, 
cornering and the extent to which the driver was distracted 
by his or her phone while on the road. 
When the three-month contest ended, four winners were 
named, receiving prizes from $500 to $2,000. Ninety-eight 
other top scorers were awarded smaller sums. 
Some 5,000 users in total had downloaded the app and 
logged 3 million miles of travel. The top 1,000 competitors 
saw their driving speeds drop by almost 35 percent and their 
phone-caused distractedness decreased by 47 percent. 
As importantly, after the competition ended, residents 
could still use the app to monitor and improve their driving. 
(See page 13 for more about safe driving.) The program 
was one of 10 finalists for the 2018 Cities of Service 
Engaged Cities Award. 
G.T. Bynum, the mayor of Tulsa, 
Oklahoma, believes data can help 
cities make better decisions and 
unite residents
	
“I ran for mayor on a platform of 
utilizing data evidence and evaluations 
not just to improve city services,” 
explains Bynum, “but as a way of 
pulling together people who might 
normally not agree with one another.”
But the new mayor had another 
challenge: When he entered office in 
the middle of a budget year, his staff 
didn’t have the expertise or capacity to 
Challenging Drivers to a Road Race
Using Data 
to Make 
Streets Safer
Identify a Challenge
City leaders are uniquely positioned to identify challenges 
that impact the city at large
Boston Mayor Martin J. Walsh (center) met with the 
winners of Boston’s Safest Driver contest. “This was a 
humbling experience overall,” said Deirdre Manning, the 
highest scorer. “I had to put my ego in the back seat and 
let all the other cars pass me.” 
OFFICE OF THE MAYOR, BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS
fully utilize the available data sources 
to smartly inform decision-making. 
Fortunately, Tulsa has a growing 
tech industry and a number of citizens 
who were eager to contribute. 
The mayor’s Performance Strategy 
and Innovation team established Urban 
Data Pioneers and put out a call for 
citizens, including city employees, to 
join the team.
The teams of local residents and 
City Hall staff have delved into data, 
largely on their own time, to create 
tools and make recommendations that 
5
The need for resilience is a fact of life — not just an abstract 
concept — in Houston, Texas. 
	
“Over three years, we’ve had three big floods in Houston,” 
Mayor Sylvester Turner said in 2018.
In August 2017, Hurricane Harvey pounded the city with 
50 inches of rain, flooding 300,000 homes and killing dozens. 
Earlier that year, an April storm brought 17 inches of rain, 
flooding more than 700 homes and killing eight people. Over 
the Memorial Day weekend in 2015, 12 inches of rain soaked 
Houston in 10 hours, killing seven and forcing 13,000 to seek 
disaster assistance.
All three events were classified as once-in-500-years 
floods. “It’s amazing no more people were killed, considering 
the magnitude of these storms — but any death is too many,” 
says Turner.
Houston’s resiliency plan seeks to ensure the sprawling 
city’s security and continued growth. A year before Harvey 
struck, Turner appointed a chief resiliency officer (also 
known as the “flood czar”).
“I believe there must be a person who reports directly to 
me and has the sole responsibility of implementing drainage 
Planning for Resilience
Houston Mayor Sylvester Turner (wearing cap) at Houston’s Emergency Operations Center.
Tulsa Mayor G.T. Bynum’s Urban 
Data Pioneers earned the 2018 Cities 
of Service Engaged Cities Award.
CITY OF HOUSTON
and flooding strategies,” said Turner. “We can continue to 
grow by building smarter than in the past. We just can’t build 
anywhere.”
In April 2018, the City Council approved Turner’s plan to 
require that all new and reconstructed homes built in a flood 
plain be at least two feet higher than the projected 500-year 
flood level. Turner also pledged that “development in the city 
of Houston, especially the kind that takes place on ‘empty’ 
land, does not make flooding worse.”
In order to hear from residents who, nearly a year after 
Hurricane Harvey, were still struggling due to the loss of their 
home, or were living in a flood-damaged home due to the 
high costs of making repairs, the city hosted public meetings 
and partnered with AARP to cohost tele–town hall meetings.
Houston also joined the Rockefeller Foundation’s 100 
Resilient Cities network. “When you’re building resiliency it’s 
not just a one-day effort. It’s a long-term effort,” Turner said 
during the announcement event. “We’re going to be dealing 
with a lot of shocks and stresses. We’ve dealt with them 
already. We’re going to deal with them this year and in the 
years to come.” 
are being used to inform policy and 
shed light on entrenched problems.
The program has changed how 
Tulsa does business. 
For years, the city had been using 
only pavement quality to evaluate and 
prioritize street improvements. 
An Urban Data Pioneers team 
created a new set of criteria that 
consider street safety and traffic to 
better prioritize improvements. The 
team also analyzed the causes of car 
crashes at intersections. 
The new criteria and research is 
helping guide many of the 
improvements included in a half-
billion-dollar capital campaign.
And the data work brought 
benefits money can't buy.
“These are folks that may 
not want to ever run for office, but 
they want to help build a better 
community,” explains Bynum. “They 
might be voting for different candidates 
for president, but they agree that we 
want to have fewer car accidents in 
Tulsa. They agree that we want to have 
safer neighborhoods.” 
CITIES OF SERVICE
6
A big-city mayor can easily disappear into the duties and 
trappings of the job. In Fort Worth, Texas (population 
850,000), Mayor Betsy Price’s solution for staying 
connected with real people and places is to host or show 
up at fun events.
Since 2011, the multi-term chief executive has hosted 
hundreds of walking, rolling and caffeinated gatherings. 
These “Town Halls for All” options are a means for 
“getting citizens of all ages involved in charting the 
course” of the city, Price explains on her website’s events 
page, by breaking “the mold of that traditional, worn out 
and sometimes boring town hall meeting.”
An avid walker, Price invites people to join her on mile 
long treks. The pace is brisk but slow enough for “show 
and tell” conversing.
Or residents can join the avid cyclist for a casual — “no 
competitive racing” — 5-mile ride. Those preferring to sit 
can attend a Saturday morning coffee talk.
Other ways to meet the mayor include competing 
against her in the annual Mayor’s Triathlon or dressing in 
costume for the annual Mayor’s Spooky Bike & Ball.
Folks not into fitness or frolicking can engage on 
YourFortWorth.org, a 24/7 online public forum, which 
Price launched in 2013 so citizens could share and vote on 
ideas to improve the city without even having to get out 
and about. 
Taking It to the Streets
Hosting Town Halls by the Thousands
Deliberate with the Community 
Better solutions are unearthed when citizens and city leaders come together 
Fort Worth Mayor Betsy Price stays engaged with the 
community by hosting lots of activities and participating 
in numerous events, such as performing with the African 
Hipsters dance company at the 2016 Mayor’s International 
Dinner & Global Awards.
GLEN E. ELLMAN
growth brought ethnic diversity, and 
nearly three decades later almost 20 
percent of the 
city’s 67,000 residents are people of 
color. More than 40 languages are 
spoken at home by students in the 
public schools. 
The rapid change brought some 
tensions, sparking campaigns such as 
Create CommUNITY, which launched a 
citywide conversation to promote 
racial harmony. 
Other ways the city takes the pulse 
of the populace is through a 
community-wide survey. Questions 
concern whether the respondent feels 
Dave Kleis, the mayor of St. Cloud, 
Minnesota, has held a town hall 
meeting every week since taking office 
in 2005. He records a weekly two-
minute video message. (Watch them 
on Twitter: @MayorDaveKleis.) 
He hands out Neighbor of the Month 
certificates. (Neighbors nominate 
neighbors.)
Once a month, Kleis invites a 
handful of people he doesn’t know to 
his house for dinner. He cooks up chili, 
with and without meat, and sometimes 
bakes an apple pie. Why? 
“For me, it’s invaluable to hear 
people’s thoughts about the city. And 
eating is a great way to stimulate a 
comfortable discussion,” he explains. 	
	
Kleis cites research that finds 
Americans’ greatest fear is public 
speaking. “It’s inherently difficult for 
many people to participate in public 
meetings,” he says. “The best way to 
get past that is to have a conversation.” 
The dinner invitees come from a list 
of potential guests drawn from town 
hall meeting participants and people 
who have called City Hall. “I try to 
reach out to people who have less 
influence in the city,” Kleis explains.
Until as recently as 1990, St. Cloud 
was 97 percent white. Strong economic 
7
In 2008, Huntington, West Virginia, was in the midst of a 
health crisis. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
had given Huntington the lowest health rating of any metro 
area in the nation.
The unflattering ranking was compounded by severe 
economic distress, rates of poverty and depression exceeding 
30 percent, and an adult obesity rate of 49 percent. Adding 
insult to injury, the Associated Press declared Huntington 
“America’s fattest and unhealthiest city.” 
In response, Huntington developed a “hub-and-spoke” 
citizen-engagement approach to foster healthy living. 
With City Hall as the hub, community stakeholders, 
businesses, academic institutions, hospitals, faith-based 
organizations and Huntington residents were encouraged to 
develop ideas and projects. Activities included targeted 
publicity about health programs, leadership development and 
citizen-led initiatives to create bicycle trails, open a farmers 
market, offer wellness classes and host dozens of 5K races. 
By 2018, Huntington’s citywide obesity rate had dropped to 
35 percent.
Mayor Steve Williams also launched a walking program 
to both encourage residents to get active and give them a 
forum for raising community concerns. 
Local leaders (including the mayor, police chief, fire chief, 
public works director and members of the sanitary board) 
walked each of the nine City Council districts alongside 
residents, who drew attention to everything from potholes 
and broken signs to blighted properties and drug activity.
“We’d walk along [and] somebody would come up and 
Helping a Community 
Trim Down and Tidy Up
“Hope isn’t a tactic. It is an outcome and it starts with 
collaboration,” says Huntington Mayor Steve Williams 
(shown at the 2018 Cities of Service Engaged Cities 
Award Summit). His community was a finalist for the 
2018 Cities of Service Engaged Cities Award.
St. Cloud Mayor Dave Kleis and guests relax on his backyard deck during a chili 
and apple pie dinner party in 2017. “Dinners like this prove [St. Cloud] can be 
our home,” said a guest, a migrant from Sudan.
KRISTOFFER TRIPPLAAR
JERRY HOLT, STAR TRIBUNE VIA ZUMA WIRE
safe, welcome and included.
In 2016, when a Somali refugee 
stabbed 10 people at the city’s 
shopping mall before being killed by 
police, the event made national news. 
Locals feared the popular shopping 
center would lose business.
So Kleis, who holds many of his 
town halls in the mall’s food court, 
made a point of visiting the mall and 
buying a suit at the Macy’s where the 
man had been shot. People of all races 
continued shopping at the mall, and 
there were no anti-immigrant protests. 
“We’ve been building community all 
that time,” Kleis later told the Star 
Tribune. “You never know you’re doing 
anything until a time of crisis.” 
point out just what was on their mind, and then they would 
fall back and someone else would settle in,” Williams recalls. 
Dozens of walks have occurred since the first one in 2015. 
As a result, drug houses have been closed, vacant homes 
have been boarded up, potholes filled, sidewalks repaired, 
“and the list goes on and on,” says Bryan Chambers, the city’s 
communications director. “It’s things that may seem small to 
someone across town, but mean everything in the world to 
the person living in that neighborhood.” 
8
ADVICE FOR NEW MAYORS
“Get outside of City Hall. It’s easy to get trapped 
into the routine of meetings and the rut of 
bureaucratic thinking. The most impactful initiatives 
I’ve led have depended on partnerships with 
companies, philanthropies and nonprofits in the 
community. We can’t get much done doing it alone, 
but cities  —  and mayors  —  are natural conveners 
of community partners. Many civic-minded people 
want to help if we just engage with them and 
provide them with a path for working with us.” 
—  Mayor Sam Liccardo
In 2016, San José, California, launched Unleash Your Geek, 
a competition in which citizens were invited to propose 
innovative solutions to some of the city’s biggest challenges. 
Under the leadership of Mayor Sam Liccardo, San José 
partnered with several organizations, including the Silicon 
Valley U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, which provided 
participants with technical assistance in obtaining patents for 
their solutions. 
The city receives an average of 2,400 graffiti removal 
requests from residents per month. Since 2011, San José has 
spent more than $4 million on graffiti eradication. And it can 
cost as much as $60,000 to shut down a highway to remove 
graffiti on a sign or overpass. 
In the first year, the competition focused on graffiti 
removal from areas that are difficult and expensive to reach, 
including freeway signs, overpasses and tall buildings. The 
inaugural challenge attracted 140 submissions. 
The winning graffiti removal solution was from a team that 
designed and equipped a drone to spray-paint over graffiti in 
hard-to-reach spots. The prototype was built in the living 
room of team leader Chris Farmer, who tested the drone’s 
talents on the back wall of a local store. Upon seeing her 
shop’s graffiti-free exterior, the owner “almost fell over with 
joy,” says Farmer.
The focus of the second Unleash Your Geek challenge 
(better flood detection) was inspired by current events. In 
2017, San José was hit with its worst flood in centuries. After 
Solving Problems — Together
Get to Work 
When city leaders and citizens collectively take action, stronger results 
are generated and trust is built
“The city of San José has stepped up and said, ‘We will be 
the testing ground if you can bring the right idea,’  ” notes 
Unleash Your Geek winner Chris Farmer (shown 
demonstrating his graffiti-removal drone). “This has 
empowered us to launch our own company, innovate in a 
stagnant industry and improve the community we live in.”
five years of drought, record-breaking rain led the nearby 
Anderson Dam to overflow, causing 14,000 residents to be 
evacuated from their homes. Liccardo asked the entire city to 
come to the aid of those in need. “Today, we’re calling on the 
whole community to help us,” he said. 
	
Over the course of two weeks, 4,000 volunteers hauled 
more than 2,000 tons of debris from flood-ravaged homes. 
The volunteers were activated quickly thanks to the existing 
infrastructure and relationships formed through Cities of 
Service partnerships with the city. “To paraphrase [basketball 
coach] John Wooden, crises do not build character, they 
reveal it,” said Liccardo. “These floods revealed much about 
the character of San José’s resilient and giving community.” 
	
The disaster also inspired the #BeautifySJ initiative to, 
explains the mayor, work with residents “to dramatically 
reduce the trash, graffiti and blight  — and restore our 
collective pride in San José.” 
CITIES OF SERVICE
9
COURTESY KEVIN VERICKER
COURTESY DIMA KHOURY
During his four-decade IT career, 
Kevin Vericker was employed by 
some of the biggest names in the 
business: HP, SAS, IBM. His work 
involved serving clients ranging from 
local, state and U.S. government 
agencies to the World Bank.
“My job was figuring out how 
we could apply analytic software to 
solving public-sector problems,” 
he explains. 
In his free time, Vericker 
volunteered in programs that helped 
at-risk youth. So as he neared 
retirement, Vericker became intrigued 
by an opportunity that would allow 
him to use his expertise while helping 
his community. 
He accepted an Encore Fellowship 
and went to work for the city of 
Miami, Florida, reporting to its chief 
service officer, Raul Hernandez, on a 
Retiring — and Inspiring — Volunteers
Studying Sources for Student Success
Dima Khoury (second from right) with San Jose Mayor 
Sam Liccardo and her daughters Rawan and Natalie.
When Dima Khoury retired in 2014 after spending nearly 
two decades at Cisco, where she served as director of 
software engineering, she “wanted to do something in the 
community, something more impactful.”
Khoury found that opportunity by joining Encore.org’s 
Generation to Generation campaign, an effort aimed at 
getting older adults to interact more with young people. 
Hired as an Encore Fellow, Khoury was assigned to work in 
Cities of Service–supported effort to 
improve student performance. 
Vericker compiled a comprehensive 
portfolio of community resources — 
from tutoring to scholarships and 
mentoring programs — along with 
impact metrics on student success. 
His work was turned into a book.
“If you’re a teacher, counselor or 
graduation coach, once you know 
the circumstances of the student 
you’re working with, you can go in 
and see what organizations offer 
services appropriate for that student,” 
he says.
Vericker describes his five-month 
assignment as “invigorating,” in part 
because the officials he worked with 
were so committed to helping youth. 
“I found myself getting up at 6 a.m. 
to beat the traffic and get to work 
early,” he says. 
Kevin Vericker (back row, right) 
with his city of Miami colleagues.
the office of San José, California, Mayor Sam Liccardo to 
help increase the participation of people age 50 and over in 
volunteering programs. 
San José “has a lot of kids who are not reaching their 
potential,” Khoury points out. “At the same time, we have 
people who are retiring from Silicon Valley companies who 
have experience, wisdom and the time to contribute, but 
we’re not really leveraging them.”
About her assignments, Khoury says, “I thought of it like a 
product campaign.” She worked to refine the messaging of 
programs that needed volunteers. To connect with recent 
retirees, she urged the programs to emphasize the flexibility 
of the time commitment. 
“People want to put in the time, but they want to be able 
to take time off to travel,” she explains. “You have to let them 
know that isn’t a problem.”
The campaign set a goal of recruiting 1,000 volunteers and 
engaging with a half-dozen youth-serving organizations. After 
just six months, the campaign had secured 700 volunteers 
and 15 youth-serving organizations.
Khoury says she has “discovered a passion for 
intergenerational work, working with kids and adults to better 
lives.” A big difference from her career in high tech, she says, 
is that “instead of talking about products, and to the brains of 
people, I was talking to hearts to get to minds.” 
EXPERIENCE MATTERS
10
When Detroit, Michigan, made 
fighting urban blight a priority, it 
discovered that families losing their 
homes to foreclosure was a key reason 
for the crisis.
One approach to tackling the issue 
was to launch an outreach campaign in 
which volunteers combed the city, 
seeking out residents at risk and 
educating them about how to avoid 
foreclosure. The effort is credited with 
helping 3,700 families keep their homes.
The work was led by Victoria 
Kovari, Detroit’s chief service officer, 
who was appointed in 2016 by Mayor 
Mike Duggan. Kovari’s position was 
funded through a $100,000 grant from 
Cities of Service. 
Her first move was to bring 
together partners who for ages had 
worked separately to solve the same or 
highly interrelated problems. She 
convened an advisory group, made up 
of staff at major corporations and 
nonprofits. 
Calling themselves Partners in 
Service, the members committed to 
meeting monthly and created a 
citywide service plan with three 
primary goals:
1.	 Keeping people in their homes 
by reducing the number of tax 
foreclosure properties
2.	 Improving the financial security 
of working families
3.	 Mitigating blight in 
neighborhoods 
CITIES OF SERVICE
Knocking on Doors to Prevent Foreclosures
Chief Service Officer (or CSO) 
Victoria Kovari (right) leverages the 
strength of the Department of 
Neighborhoods to coordinate 
community engagement and 
volunteering activities in Detroit, 
with a focus on reducing blight and 
preventing crime. As CSO, Kovari is 
a champion for resident volunteers, 
a voice for the mayor, a partner to 
city agencies and a conduit for 
businesses and community groups.
Show Impact
With real results, city leaders can celebrate success and fuel further 
citizen engagement
Fran Kaliher (third from left) and Leo Babeu (third from right) founded 
KTWH to keep their small city informed about local news and weather.
KTWH
Kovari also asked the city’s seven 
district managers — neighborhood 
leaders who have strong relationships 
with residents, businesses and clergy 
— to form an unofficial group of advisers 
for helping vet strategies and plans.
The city identified 5,600 occupied 
homes at high risk of foreclosure and 
launched a targeted, volunteer-staffed, 
door-to-door outreach campaign. The 
result? Two-thirds of the homes visited 
were diverted from foreclosure.
“Developing a citywide strategy 
with corporate, nonprofit and city 
partners was transformative,” Kovari 
says. “We were able to amplify blight 
mitigation approaches that were 
already working, focus resources on 
the areas of greatest need and build an 
infrastructure to support citizen 
engagement.” 
	
People who want to volunteer with 
the Serve Detroit initiative can visit its 
online portal to sign up for projects. 
11
The notion for a community radio 
station came to Fran Kaliher in 2012, 
on the day a flash flood overwhelmed 
Two Harbors, Minnesota 
(population 3,700). 
	
“Every way I tried to drive into town 
was impassable,” she recalls. “That’s 
when I thought, ‘We need to have a 
radio station so people could find out 
what’s happening.’ ”
Kaliher shared her idea with folks 
around town, including Leo Babeu, 
who had once worked in radio. Their 
creation, KTWH 99.5 FM, has a 
Spreading the News
broadcast radius of up to 10 miles.
Four dozen volunteers and two 
part-timers work out of a crowded 
three-room studio behind a 
Vietnamese restaurant. The broadcast 
schedule ranges from Linda Lee’s polka 
show to Baroque music to discussions 
about veterans’ issues to steel guitar 
music to “The Flip Side,” on which both 
sides of hit 45-rpm records are spun. 
KTWH also broadcasts from 
remote locations in town, allowing live 
coverage of the Heritage Days parade 
in July and high school basketball, 
Antonio Hendrickson was 25 years old when 
he was convicted on drug conspiracy charges and sent to 
prison for 22 years, then the mandatory minimum under 
federal sentencing guidelines. Now in his 50s, Hendrickson 
sees himself in the New York City adolescents he mentors.
“I identify with them. All of those shenanigans they’re 
trying to play, I’m hip to it,” he explains. “More than that, I 
care about them — and they know it.” 
Hendrickson began his mentorship work in prison, where 
he established a program that had older convicts counseling 
new inmates about the impulsivity and anger that often lead 
to crime and recidivism. After being released in 2013, 
Hendrickson was determined to use his experience to break 
the cycle of violence in his Harlem neighborhood and stop 
the flow of young people to prison — or worse. 
Lead by Example Reverse the Trend, his nonprofit 
organization, was created to help prepare young people in 
disadvantaged communities for adulthood. 
“These particular kids are emotionally challenged — not 
mentally challenged,” Hendrickson emphasizes. “They don’t 
know how to handle their emotions when they’re confronted 
with challenges, and it manifests in their behavior. They get 
into fights, disrupt their classes and get suspended.” 
“They’re angry, and often with reason,” he adds. “Nobody 
listens to them. They have no voice, no power and no hope.” 
Often, the teens come from homes where their mothers work 
long hours and their fathers are absent, in prison or dead. 
Hendrickson believes that when at-risk youth are armed 
with positive communication strategies and social skills, they 
can become productive, confident adults. He runs school and 
community programs that bring together ex-convicts and 
“off-track scholars,” as Hendrickson calls them. “We give 
them the support they need from somebody they can 
respect, trust and talk to.” 
Antonio Hendrickson (seated, wearing yellow pants) with 
participants in a Lead by Example workshop. 
SILVIO PACIFICO 
Respect, trust and attention are the three things 
Hendrickson and his team of ex-offenders seek to provide 
every youngster, in endless measure, during Saturday 
morning basketball games, on field trips and in classrooms 
throughout Harlem and the South Bronx. 
“You’ll see. In just six to eight weeks, their thought process 
changes. Their behaviors change,” Hendrickson says. “And if 
you ask them, ‘Do you want more?’ they say, ‘Yes!’ ” 
hockey and football. Since KTWH 
streams over the Internet, snowbirds 
wintering down south can follow their 
grandkids’ games. 
So what does the community think 
of this eclectic hot dish of radio 
programming? Kaliher, whose station 
bio describes her as “just old enough 
to have known life before television,” 
is proud to share: “Well, we exceeded 
our expectations on the first 
community pledge drive.” Adds 
Babeu, “We’re going to ask for more 
next time.” 
Reversing the Trend
LEADING BY EXAMPLE
“Many of our mentors have lived the life. They’re 
real people with histories and personal 
experience of the real issues facing young people 
in disadvantaged communities today. Our 
mentors are not academics coming in to troubled 
communities to tell young people that their 
behavior — truancy, violence, drugs, and crime 
— will land them in trouble. Many of our mentors 
did skip school, did join gangs, and did commit 
crimes. All have paid their dues and don’t want 
others to make the same mistakes.”
— Lead by Example Reverse the Trend
EXPERIENCE MATTERS
12
Get Engaged
Engaging the ‘Experienced Class’
People age 50+ enhance communities through their skills and 
life lessons, influence and involvement
ERIC KRUSZEWSKI FOR AARP
AARP volunteers throughout the nation plan and staff events, lead advocacy 
efforts, provide professional-level services (such as through the AARP 
Foundation Tax-Aide program), serve as mentors (the AARP Experience Corp) 
and teach courses. (See the top article on the opposite page.) 
According to the 2018 AARP Home 
and Community Preferences Survey 
of people age 50 or older, 50 
percent say it’s “extremely or very 
important” to have volunteer 
opportunities that allow them to 
actively engage in their community. 
Older volunteers bring a wealth 
of insights and professional 
experience that can help local 
leaders improve the lives of people 
in their communities and states.
Want to harness the skills and 
know-how of the Experienced 
Class? Get to know AARP and 
tap into these resources:
•	 Connect with AARP staff at the 
state office near you: 
AARP.org/States
•	 Learn about AARP’s community-
based activities, resources and 
volunteer opportunities: 
Local.AARP.org
•	 Receive AARP research about 
volunteering and civic engagement 
by sending an email (Subject line: 
Volunteerism Research) to: 
Volunteer@AARP.org
•	 Use AARP’s free online volunteer-
matching tool to post and promote 
local volunteer opportunities: 
CreateTheGood.org
•	 Find inspiring articles and 
resources about volunteering:
CreateTheGood.org/GetInspired
1.	 	 In addition to connecting with AARP, professional associations can help in 
recruiting volunteers with specific skills. People who show up at meetings and 
events related to your issue area might also be willing to get involved.
2.	 	 Offer a range of opportunities so volunteers can choose how they’d like to take 
part in a community effort. Keep options open. Volunteers often increase their 
commitment over time through progressive levels of leadership.
3.	 	 Consider how you can leverage the life lessons, skills and influence of the 
“Experienced Class” to benefit your organization or effort. Make use of the 
specialized knowledge and “soft skills” (such as meeting facilitation and 
partnership building) that older volunteers bring from their careers. 
4.	 	 Always provide training — and feedback — to a new volunteer or someone 
assuming a new role. 
5.	 	 Everyone wants to know that their efforts make a difference. Show your 
volunteers how their contributions impact the community and make it a better 
place. Recognize and thank people for their meaningful work.
— Rebecca Delphia, Advisor, AARP Livable Communities
Finding and Working with Volunteers
13
In many communities and for many 
older adults, being able to drive — and 
do so safely for as long as possible — 
is the key to living independently. 
That’s why Sherry Kolodziejczak, 
an occupational therapist, is a 
volunteer instructor for the AARP 
Smart Driver course, which enables 
older drivers to maintain their skills, 
adjust to age-related challenges, and 
learn about the advances in car 
technology and changes in driving laws.
“We’re aging, and that’s just 
normal, but we have to recognize what 
has changed and work within those 
means,” Kolodziejczak says. 
As the director of the ALS Care 
Clinic and other therapy programs at 
Crestwood Medical Center in 
Huntsville, Alabama, Kolodziejczak 
interacts with patients who want to get 
back behind the wheel after recovering 
Teaching Drivers 
to Drive Smarter 
Empowering Entrepreneurs
Sherry Kolodziejczak, an occupational 
therapist, is a volunteer instructor 
for the AARP Smart Driver course. 
(Learn more: AARP.org/DriverSafety.)
SCORE volunteer Fred Weinhold (far left), one of his 
clients and a business banker at the Tennessee Valley 
Federal Credit Union. 
AARP DRIVER SAFETY
older students, Kolodziejczak 
says, “is proving that their driving 
challenges are not always due to 
their age.” 
During his career with the federal government, Princeton-
educated engineer Fred Weinhold served in Washington 
under four U.S. presidents. He also worked on the 
development of a nuclear-powered U.S. Navy for Adm. 
Hyman G. Rickover and in the late 1970s was part of the team 
that helped establish the U.S. Department of Energy. 
	
After all that, he became the head of research and 
development for the Tennessee Valley Authority.
Now retired, Weinhold lives near Chattanooga, 
Tennessee, and has a different, but still important, mission. 
As a volunteer counselor for the Chattanooga branch of 
SCORE (Service Corps of Retired Executives), a resource 
partner of the U.S. Small Business Administration, Weinhold 
uses his organizational expertise to help local entrepreneurs 
get their ventures off the ground. His specialty is advising 
community groups on how to set up 501(c)(3) nonprofit 
organizations, enabling them to apply for foundation grants 
and government funding. 
“For a long time, if you wanted to get an Internal Revenue 
Service determination letter to be a nonprofit, you had to 
submit a 30-page application,” Weinhold explains. “It took a 
year, and a lot of people would have to spend thousands of 
dollars on a lawyer.”
But the IRS came up with an online process for 
organizations with less than $50,000 in annual revenue, he 
adds. “If you’ve got a computer and somebody to coach you, 
you can apply in an hour, and in a couple of weeks you can 
get an answer, which is almost always yes.”
Weinhold says his volunteer work does pay: “It gives 
me a chance to be out with people who are active and 
working in the world. It’s important to me to stay involved 
with the community.” 
COURTESY FRED WEINHOLD
from head injuries and strokes.
About a decade ago, an AARP staff 
member who knew of Kolodziejczak’s 
expertise asked her to assist with 
AARP CarFit, a program that helps 
older drivers add or use safety features 
in their vehicles. 
The reward for volunteering comes, 
Kolodziejczak says, when someone in 
her class looks up while she’s teaching 
and leans in a little more. 
“That’s when you know you’ve 
touched upon something the person is 
concerned about,” she says.
Kolodziejczak sometimes invites 
class members to bring their teenage 
grandchildren with them, so new 
drivers and veteran drivers can talk 
about shared experiences and 
difficulties, such as avoiding distractions 
and maintaining a focus on the road. 
Part of the satisfaction for her 
EXPERIENCE MATTERS
AARP is the nation’s largest nonprofit, nonpartisan 
organization dedicated to empowering people 50 and older 
to choose how they live as they age. With a nationwide 
presence and nearly 38 million members, AARP strengthens 
communities and advocates for what matters most to 
families: health security, financial stability and personal 
fulfillment. The AARP Livable Communities initiative works 
nationwide to support the efforts of neighborhoods, towns, 
cities and rural areas to be livable for people of all ages. 
Websites: AARP.org and AARP.org/Livable
Email: Livable@AARP.org
Facebook: /AARPLivableCommunities
Twitter: @AARPLivable
Free Newsletter: AARP.org/Livable-Subscribe
Location: 601 E Street NW, Washington, D.C. 20049
Join the Network
The AARP Network of Age-Friendly States and 
Communities encourages states, cities, counties and towns 
to prepare for the rapid aging of the U.S. population. By 
doing so, these communities are better equipped to become 
great places, and even lifelong homes, for people of all ages. 
Membership in the network does not mean AARP is 
endorsing the community as a place to live. Nor does it mean 
the community is currently age-friendly. What membership 
means is that the elected local leadership has made the 
commitment to actively work with residents to make the 
community great for people of all ages. Learn more and 
check out the member list at AARP.org/AgeFriendly.
Cities of Service is a nonprofit organization that helps 
mayors build stronger cities by changing the way local 
government and citizens work together. Cities of Service 
helps coalition cities tap into the knowledge, creativity and 
service of their citizens to help identify and solve critical 
public problems. Cities of Service supports a coalition of 
more than 250 cities, representing over 70 million people 
across the Americas and Europe.
Website: CitiesOfService.org
Email: Info@CitiesOfService.org
Facebook: /CitiesOfService
Twitter: @CitiesOfService
Free Newsletter: CitiesOfService.org/Newsletter-Signup
Location: 120 Park Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10017
Join the Coalition
Through comprehensive planning, strong partnerships and a 
focus on results, Cities of Service supports cities that are 
working to engage their citizens in initiatives that create real 
and lasting change for their communities. Strong mayoral 
leadership is key to success for Cities of Service Coalition 
members. To join the coalition or see if your city is already a 
member, visit CitiesOfService.org/Join-the-Coalition. 
Engaging the Community to Create Community
EDITOR: Melissa Stanton, AARP Livable Communities | ART DIRECTOR: Mimi Park, Design Park Inc. | CONTRIBUTING EDITOR: Jeremy Sierra, Cities of Service 
COPY EDITOR: Don Armstrong | ART PRODUCTION: Steve Walkowiak 
ABOUT US
OUR PROGRAMS
Copyright @ AARP 2018 All Rights Reserved. AARP is a registered trademark. 
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While AARP, Cities of Service and the contributors to this publication have used their best efforts in preparing this resource, they make no representations or warranties with 
respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation or community. The named organizations and contributors will not be liable for 
any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential or other damages. The fact that an organization or website is referred to in this work as a citation and/or 
a potential source of further information does not mean that AARP, Cities of Service, the editor and/or contributors endorse the information the organization or website may provide or recommendations it may make. 
Further, readers should be aware that websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read.
Download or order a free copy of this publication at AARP.org/CommunityEngagement
D20461
